Anaerobic digestion for the stabilization of the organic fraction of municipal waste





1. Introduction
 
Over the past few decades, many developing 
countries all over the world have 
experienced a sharp increase in population. 
This uncontrolled population 
growth coupled with rapid urbanization 
and gradual rise in the per capita income 
have led to an unprecedented increase in 
the annual generation of municipal solid 
waste (MSW). MSW necessarily comprises 
market refuse, food waste (FW), 
kitchen waste, garden waste, dead animals, 
etc. It was reported by Kawai and 
Tasaki (2016) that the average MSW 
generation rate in the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), the European Union 
(EU), and the United States of America 
(USA) was 1.324 kg/person per day. In 
seven South Asian countries (Maldives, 
Sri-Lanka, Pakistan, Bhutan, 
Bangladesh, India, and Nepal) the average 
MSW generation rate has been 
found to be 0.853 kg/person per day 
with the highest generation of 2.8 kg/ 
person per day in Maldives (Peterson 
2013). Similarly, in 15 countries of East 
Asia and the Pacific Islands (Solomon 
Islands, Tonga, Mongolia, Myanmar, 
China, Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, 
Lao PDR, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, 
Brunei Darussalam, Fiji, and Vanuatu) 
the average per capita solid waste 
generation rate has been found to be 
1.288 kg/person per day with the highest 
generation of 4.30 kg/person per day in 
Solomon Islands (Hoornweg and Bhada-
Tata 2012). The present quantity of 
solid waste generation worldwide is 2 
billion tons per year and is predicted to 
increase to 3 billion tons by 2025 (Key 
Note Publications Ltd. 2007). By 2100 
the MSW generation rate is expected to 
exceed 11 million tons per day (World 
Bank 2013). Because of lack of infrastructure, 
suitable strategies, man power, 
and economic constraints the municipal 
bodies in most cities of developing 
countries have been unable to come up 
with an effective and sustainable 
methodology for collection and disposal 
of MSW. As a result, these solid wastes 
are either dumped out into open spaces, 
in low lying areas, causing all sorts of 
nuisance and health hazards, or are disposed 
of into primitive sanitary landfills 
in the outskirts of cities. In a few 
cases, the generated MSW is also subjected 
to composting or thermal incineration. 
The landfilling operation of organic 
fraction of municipal solid wastes 
(OFMSW) is a common and widely 
practiced mode of solid waste disposal 
worldwide. But, with the decreasing 
availability of land, this method is now 
under a great challenge to manage the 
requisite space. It is also worthy to mention 
that a poorly managed sanitary 
landfill for solid waste may lead to 
many problems, such as uncontrolled 
emission of greenhouse gases (GHG) into 
the atmosphere evolving a catastrophic 
scenario, generation of leachate contaminating 
the ground water and generation 
of disease vectors adversely affecting 
the public health and hygiene. Composting, 
on the other hand, is a process 
that also requires considerable land akin 
to sanitary landfilling. But the composting 
facilitates the treatment of only a 
few types of the organic waste generated 
on a daily basis. Applications of composting 
include: (i) yard waste, (ii) separated 
MSW, (iii) commingled MSW, etc. 
(Tchobanoglous et al. 1993). The product 
obtained after composting of the 
OFMSW is generally used up as a soil 
conditioner, whereas landfilling operations 
occasionally generate biogas and 
also enhance soil fertility. Hence, the 
scope of marketing the products after 
the solid organic waste is subjected to 
composting is very much limited as it is 
a localized process. However, both composting 
and sanitary landfilling are not 
able to strike a balance between the generated 
and stabilized quanta of waste. 
Thermal incineration, which involves 
considerable volume reduction of the 
generated MSW, has various drawbacks, 
such as the requirement of an external 
supply of oxygen, a well-equipped burning 
system, and other appropriate pollution 
control accessories. Thus it can be 
inferred that despite all the benefits obtained 
from the aforesaid processes, the 
involvement of an exorbitant cost para- 

4



digm and an imbalance in the generation 
and stabilization rate of the MSW has 
necessitated the municipalities to look 
for other techno-economically viable 
solutions. Anaerobic digestion (AD) of 
OFMSW has proved to be the most effective 
and sound methodology for replacement 
in this regard (Mata-Alvarez 
et al. 1990, 2000). 
AD of OFMSW is a biochemical 
process where solid organic matter is 
converted to biogas and highly concentrated 
sludge through a series of reactions 
mediated by several micro-organisms. 
AD of OFMSW involves the stabilization 
of solid organic matter via 
three major phases, namely, the semi-
anaerobic hydrolysis phase, the semi-
anaerobic acidogenesis phase, and 
the strictly anaerobic methanogenesis 
phase (Gerardi 2003) to produce 
C[H.sub.4] and C[O.sub.2] along with 
a small fraction of other gases (such as 
[H.sub.2], N[H.sub.3], [H.sub.2]S, 
[N.sub.2], etc.). AD mainly focuses on 
the volumetric reduction of the large initial 
amount of the solid organic fraction 
to liquid state (via hydrolysis). Thereafter, 
different bacteria convert that liquid 
into volatile fatty acids (VFAs) and 
alcohols (via acidogenesis) and in the final 
phase, those acids and alcohols get 
converted to gases, primarily 
C[O.sub.2] and C[H.sub.4] (via 
methanogenesis). 
However, there is an additional and 
equally important acetogenesis phase 
(Ljungdahl and Wood 1969; Deublein 
and Steinhauser 2008; Khanal 2008) 
preceding the methanogenesis phase, 
which also plays a crucial role in the 
AD. The fermentative bacteria firstly 
degrade polysaccharides to monosaccharides 
or glucose via hydrolysis, 
which is then converted into fatty acids, 
alcohols, and [H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] 
via acidogenesis. The acetogens, however, 
convert the higher fatty acids into 
acetate and [H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2]. 
Homoacetogens, on the other hand, convert 
[H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] into acetate. 
Thus the fermentative bacteria and 
the syntrophic acetogen produce 
[H.sub.2], C[O.sub.2], acetate, and other 
products, while the homoacetogen utilize 
the [H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] to 
produce acetate (Nie et al. 2008). In an 
earlier study by the same team (Nie et al. 
2007) it was established that the property 
of homoacetogens to convert 
[H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] into acetate 
was a viable strategy to enhance the production 
of acetate by collecting and converting 
[H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] into 
acetate via homoace-togenesis. 
These homoacetogenic bacteria, which 
are often known as acetogenic bacteria, 
are anaerobic microbes, most of whom 
catalyze the formation of acetate from 
[H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] in their energy 
metabolism (Diekert and Wohlfarth 
1994). These anaerobes can use the 
Wood-Ljungdahl pathway to: (i) synthesize 
acetyl-CoA by the reduction of CO 
or C[O.sub.2] plus [H.sub.2]; (ii) conserve 
energy; and (iii) fix (assimilate) 
C[O.sub.2] for the synthesis of cell carbon 
(Drake et al. 2008). The first isolated 
acetogen was Clostridium aceticum, 
which was spore-forming and 
mesophilic in nature (Wieringa 1939). 
Later on, the bacterium could not be isolated 
anymore and further investigations 
led to the isolation of the second acetogen, 
which was Clostridium ihermoaceticum 
(spore-forming, thermophilic) 
(Fontaine et al. 1942). This 
bacterium, later re-classified as Moorella 
thermoacetica (Collins et al. 1994), 
was the model organism for the elucidation 
of the biochemical and enzymological 
features of the acetyl-CoA pathway 
by Harland G.Wood and Lars G. Ljungdahl, 
which was dubbed the Wood- 
Ljungdahl pathway (Ljungdahl and 
Wood 1969). The acetogens are able to 
grow chemolithoautotrophically under 
anaerobic conditions converting CO or 
[H.sub.2] plus C[O.sub.2] as sole carbon 
sources primarily into acetate. CO and 
(or) C[O.sub.2] are the substrates for the 
two branches, namely, the methyl and 
the carbonyl branches, of the Wood- 
Ljungdahl pathway. Acetyl-CoA is the 
main intermediate of the pathway and it 
serves as a precursor for the anabolism 
and catabolism of the respective microbes 
(Schiel-Bengelsdorf and Durre 
2012). 
Unlike other types of conventional 
waste matter, the OFMSW need to be 
shredded and homogenized into fine 
particles before treatment. If the initial 
amount of moisture present in the waste, 
which usually depends on the nature of 
the waste, is not substantial, water 
should be externally added to the shredded 
and homogenized material to promote 
hydrolysis and the subsequent biochemical 
reactions. The biochemical 
pathway for degradation of the solid organic 
wastes via AD is shown in Fig. 
1. The important factors influencing this 
pathway are temperature, pressure, particle 
size, moisture content, total solid 
(TS) content, etc. 
The several benefits that can be obtained 
through AD include reduction of a significant 
amount of OFMSW that is generated 
daily in a balancing manner, generation 
of substantial amounts of biogas 
and the generation of bio-sludge, which 
can be an effective soil conditioner. The 
generated biogas primarily comprises 
carbon dioxide (30%-40%) and methane 
(60%-70%) along with a small fraction 

5



of other gases, of which the produced 
methane gas can be utilized as a source 
of heat for electricity generation and as 
fuel for automobiles. Other advantages 
of AD include requirement of small 
space for treatment, prevention of 
spreading of disease vectors and minimization 
of ground water contamination, 
which is a problem especially associated 
with sanitary landfilling and composting. 
The AD of OFMSW produces 
biogas, which has a comparatively lower 
percentage of carbon dioxide 
(30%-40%) and higher percentage of 
methane (60%-70%). The methane produced 
can be utilized in various ways 
and thus significantly contributes to the 
global scheme of renewable energy; 
whereas the carbon dioxide produced 
does not have such wide applications. 
Moreover, carbon dioxide is the principal 
contributor to the greenhouse effect. 
As a result, AD of OFMSW, unlike 
classical MSW management practices, 
does not contribute to the greenhouse effect. 
In this review the authors primarily 
focus on the: (i) importance and potential 
of AD of OFMSW, (ii) various 
operational aspects of AD of OFMSW, 
(iii) various case studies pertaining to 
pilot and field-scale application and also 
full-scale implementation in large towns 
and cities, (iii) kinetic models that have 
been developed hitherto, (v) the different 
approaches for process design, and 
(vi) different modalities for utilization 
of the produced energy at the community 
and industrial level.




 
2. Origin of AD of OFMSW

Interestingly, OFMSW was first observed 
to undergo AD in sanitary landfills 
and this was detected essentially at 
a very high solids concentration (Farquhar 
and Rovers 1973; Rees 1980). 
This result prompted many scientists 
and researchers to come up with the idea 
of an effective methodology, which 
would not only serve as a potent substitute 
for landfilling operations, but would 
also be economical with regard to capital 
investment and generated sludge. As 
such, AD of OFMSW came into the 
thrust area of research and gradually it 
was developed. The development was 
brought about by various experimental 
studies on AD of OFMSW. These were 
conducted over the last three decades 
and led to the invention of a wide range 
of modifications on AD of OFMSW. 
After the discovery of AD of OFMSW 
in sanitary landfills, in the early 1970s, 
very little development was observed in 
the next four to five years. However, 
since the early 1980s, the AD of OFMSW 
received greater attention with the 
introduction of both pilot and commercial 
AD plant designs. In the past 
decade, AD of OFMSW has found a 
wide application across Europe with the 
development of many full-scale plants 
(Mata-Alvarez et al. 2000). The present 
statistics indicate that 1.3 billion metric 
tons of MSW are generated annually in 
the world, which is expected to rise to 
about 2.2 billion tons by 2025 (Hoornweg 
and Bhada-Tata 2012). Earlier, it 
was reported by Bolzonella et al. (2003) 
that nearly 1 million tons of organic 
wastes (wet weight) were being digested 
throughout the world. AD of the solid 
organic wastes not only ensures stabilization 
of these enormous quantities of 
waste, but also converts them into biogas 
(Verstraete et al. 2000). Moreover, 
AD when coupled with post-composting 
(Kubier and Rumphorst 1999; Verstraete 
et al. 2000) also minimizes the 
emission of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere 
thereby playing a significant 
role in the abatement of global warming. 





3. Innovative developments on AD of OFMSW
 
Chynoweth et al. (1992) and Chugh et 
al. (1995) proposed a leachate management 
strategy that ensured: (i) the microorganisms 
that were involved in the 
AD were able to get sufficient moisture 
and nutrients required for rapid conversion 
of the OFMSW; and (ii) the removal 
of inhibitory fermentative products 
during startup. The reason behind 
developing this leachate management 
strategy was that there was a lack of stability 
in reactors that were loaded with 
high solids-content during long start-up 
periods. The multistage leachate recycle 
configuration proposed by them overcame 
this problem. In a separate study, 
Nopharatana et al. (1998) designed an 
arrangement consisting of two-stage digesters 
where recirculation of leachate 
into the fresh organic matter was done. 
It was observed that formate degradation 
activity followed the methane production 
rate with both reaching a maximum 
value simultaneously at a certain 
time. Hence, it was observed that the recirculation 
of leachate offered better optimization 
of the AD of OFMSW, with 
regards to the energy yield and process 
economics (Di Maria et al. 2012). 
Since the late 20th century, AD of OFMSW 
has improved by leaps and bounds 
with commercial and pilot AD plants 
coming into the fore. As such, Rodriguez-
Iglesias et al. (1998) studied the 
pilot scale AD of OFMSW and achieved 
a maximum methane yield of 66% of the 
total biogas produced. Earlier, Kayhanian 
and Rich (1995) conducted a pilot 
scale study on high solids thermophilic 
AD of OFMSW with an emphasis on 
nutrient requirements and concluded 
that addition of micro- and macronutrients 
to OFMSW prior to digestion re- 

6



sulted in stable operation and elevated 
gas production. The robustness of the 
methanogens depends largely on a variety 
of mineral nutrients because of their 
diverse population dynamics. Various 
activities of the methanogens, such as 
protein synthesis, nucleic acid synthesis, 
increasing cell wall permeability, and 
enhanced metabolism, depend on the 
presence of various macro- and micronutrients, 
such as carbon, nitrogen, 
phosphorus, potassium, sulfur, and iron. 
The heterogeneous nature of the 
biodegradable organic fraction of municipal 
solid waste (BOFMSW) makes 
it imperative for nutrient supplementation 
during the addition of the synthetic 
feedstock so that there is an increased 
stabilization of the digester performance 
treating BOFMSW in a high solids AD. 
Dry digestion or high solids AD systems 
are more robust and flexible as opposed 
to wet digestion systems because of 
their higher biomass concentration and 
controlled feeding. It was observed that, 
compared to food waste (FW) and 
shredded organic fraction of municipal 
solid waste (SH-OFMSW), OFMSW 
had the highest methane yield per gram 
of VS degraded, which was also a maximum 
along with dissolved organic carbon 
(DOC) removal. Forster-Carneiro et 
al. (2008a) stressed the importance of 
the dry digestion of FW and conducted 
AD for the stabilization of three types of 
organic substrates--FW, SH-OFMSW, 
and OFMSW. Hence, it was once again 
inferred that the nature of the organic 
substrate had an important role to play 
on the biodegradation process and 
methane yield. A kinetic model was developed 
by Bollon et al. (2011), which 
specifically assessed the degradation of 
the OFMSW in the dry AD. 
The phenomena of inhibition arising out 
of high solids anaerobic digestion 
(HSAD) of OFMSW were addressed by 
Schievano et al. (2010) when the same 
process was applied to the highly putrescent 
OFMSW. Later on, Yu et al. (2012) 
established a comprehensive model to 
configure a new two-stage HSAD system 
designed for highly degradatile 
OFMSW. Earlier in another study, 
Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2010) focused on 
the start-up and stabilization of an AD 
system at thermophilic temperature 
range (55[degrees]C) and dry conditions 
(30% TS) and semi-continuously fed for 
the treatment of OFMSW. The focusing 
on the start-up and stabilization phase 
can be linked with the adaption of the 
inoculum employed, which in the aforesaid 
study was a mixture of leachate and 
sewage sludge in 1:1 v/v. 
Temperature, in both the mesophilic 
(30-38 [degrees]C) and the thermophilic 
(49-57 [degrees]C) range, plays a crucial 
role in the AD of OFMSW with regards 
to high methane production. Earlier 
AD of OFMSW was done at 
mesophilic temperatures (Cecchi et al. 
1993), but after successful demonstrations 
at thermophilic temperatures, both 
in laboratory-scale (Wellinger et al. 
1992) and full-scale levels (Cozzolino 
et al. 1992), the thermophilic anaerobic 
process gained significant interest because 
of its higher loading rate and 
greater volume of gas production (Cecchi 
et al. 1991). The sequential development 
of AD of OFMSW, considering 
the operating temperature, is shown in 
Fig. 2. The selection of dry conditions at 
thermophilic temperature range results 
in the process being much faster, with 
a much cleaner product obtained, than 
when mesophilic or wet conditions are 
used. Besides, the hydrolysis stage on 
the complex organic or biological material 
is better and the C[H.sub.4] generation 
is higher in the case of the thermophilic 
temperature regime than it is 
under mesophilic and wet conditions. 
The effect of change in temperature 
regime from mesophilic to thermophilic 
on the start-up phase of AD of OFMSW 
has also been well demonstrated. 
In a study by Sasaki et al. (2011), the 
methanogenic pathway and the microbial 
community in a thermophilic AD 
of organic solid waste in a continuousflow 
stirred-tank reactor using artificial 
garbage slurry as a feedstock was investigated. 
The study implied that the microbial 
community in the thermophilic 
degrading process consisted exclusively 
of unidentified bacteria, which efficiently 
removed acetate through a non-acetoclastic 
oxidative pathway thereby increasing 
the methane yield. In another 
study, a comparison among the most 
common types of anaerobic digesters, 
such as that of the single-stage, the twostage, 
and the batch systems, was made 
by Vandevivere et al. (2002). The starting 
stages of AD are significantly influenced 
by two most important factors-- 
inocula (Castillo et al. 2006) and TS 
content (Li et al. 2009); obviously pressure 
also plays a crucial role in the generation 
of biogas and stabilization. In 
high-altitude areas, where the atmospheric 
pressure is relatively low, the AD 
process would have to proceed under 
relatively low partial pressure of 
C[O.sub.2] resulting in a higher pH environment. 
This would enable the AD 
system to resist acidification and 
achieve a higher organic loading rate 
(OLR) (Zhang et al. 2005). Jiang et al. 
(2010) examined the influence of atmospheric 
pressure on the performance of 
AD of OFMSW, using a self-designed 
AD experimental system that simulated 
different pressures. 

7



Hitherto, the enzyme activities in AD of 
real organic wastes have been paid very 
little attention because the enzymes are 
too scarce to determine selectively and 
the enzymatic reactions are too specific 
and diverse to cover various enzymes 
involved in overall pathways. However, 
Kim et al. (2012) enhanced the understanding 
of the enzyme activities of 
anaerobic microorganisms in an anaerobic 
digester treating real OFMSW by 
quantitatively determining the representative 
enzyme activities of extracellular 
cell-free liquids. 
Mixing has a tremendous impact on the 
start-up of mesophilic co-digestion systems 
and thermophilic digesters fed with 
acetate. This was brought to light by 
overcoming the operational difficulties 
and instability problems encountered 
during thermophilic AD of OFMSW by 
Angelidaki et al. (2006). Besides, 
Ghanimeh et al. (2012) assessed the effect 
of mixing on the performance of 
thermophilic AD treating source-sorted 
organic fraction of municipal solid 
waste (SS-OFMSW) during the start-up 
phase, using cattle manure as a seed 
source. Recently, small-scale decentralized 
anaerobic systems have become attractive 
and easy to manipulate with the 
feedstock characteristics. Zeshan et al. 
(2012) studied the effect of the carbon to 
nitrogen (C/N) ratio and associated ammonia-
nitrogen accumulation in a pilotscale 
dry thermophilic AD system designed 
for decentralized applications. It 
was concluded that the problem associated 
with ammonia-nitrogen accumulation 
can be easily overcome by adjusting 
the feedstock C/N ratio in case of a 
decentralized small-scale AD system as 
opposed to a large-scale centralized system. 
It is a well-known fact that incineration 
of MSW has the potential to produce 
steam and electricity besides producing 
residues, such as fly ash (FA) and bottom 
ash (BA). Lo et al. (2012) investigated 
the addition of various MSW incineration 
ashes to the AD of OFMSW. 
It was observed from the study that, an 
solids retention time (SRT) of 20 days 
resulted in an increased biogas production 
rate compared to an SRT of 5 and 
10 days for a given organic load of both 
FA and BA. However, it was also seen 
that at an SRT of 20 days the reactor 
dosed with BA showed better biogas 
production rate compared to the reactor 
dosed with FA. The significance of a 
higher SRT was emphasized along with 
the increased efficiency of BA compared 
to FA. The heterogeneous nature 
of OFMSW necessitates the requirement 
of specific studies for optimizing 
the dry mesophilic AD of various OFMSW. 
The heterogeneous nature of OFMSW 
warrants optimization of the AD 
process so that the different types of 
OFMSW may be treated in a specific 
manner with regards to certain critical 
parameters, such as SRT and OLR, 
which are two of the most important operational 
parameters in AD. Rodriguez 
et al. (2012) determined the optimum 
SRT and the relevant OLR for the 
mesophilic AD of OFMSW. It was observed 
that, at an SRT of 20 days the 
methane productivity rate and the organic 
matter removal rate were higher than 
those observed at SRTs of 15 and 30 
days. 
So far as energy is concerned, hydrogen 
can also be considered as one of the 
clean alternative fuels produced from 
AD of OFMSW, along with methane. 
Hydrogen is one of the most promising 
energy sources for the future because 
it is more environmental friendly than 
methane and has the ability to be used 
in fuel cells in the transportation infrastructure. 
As such, when blended with 
compressed natural gas as a fuel for vehicles 
hydrogen has been found to reduce 
[NO.sub.x] emission by as much 
as 50% (DiStefano and Palomar 2010). 
Also this fuel may be assigned the role 
of replacing the fossil fuels in the near 
future thereby highlighting the need for 
"hydrogen economy" (Das and 
Veziroglu 2001). Romero Aguilar et al. 
(2013) analyzed the effect of hydraulic 
retention time (HRT) on the hydrogen 
production from the OFMSW coming 
from a full-scale mechanical-biologicaltreatment 
(MBT) plant using an anaerobic 
continuous stirred tank reactor 
(CSTR) operated at thermophilic-dry 
conditions (55 [degrees]C and 20% in 
TS concentration, respectively). It was 
observed that the maximum hydrogen 
and specific hydrogen were produced at 
an HRT of 1.9 days with a feeding 
regime of twice a day. In another study, 
conducted by Kim and Kim (2013), a 
three-stage fermentation system was developed 
that achieved stabilization of 
FW to [H.sub.2] and C[H.sub.4]. The 
system especially emphasized achieving 
higher [H.sub.2] yield than the mere 
20% recovery of [H.sub.2] in most AD 
reactors stabilizing OFMSW. Fig. 3 represents 
a typical flow sheet of AD of 
OFMSW up to biogas generation and 
sludge recovery.




 
4. Role of various factors influencing AD of OFMSW

The performance of AD in stabilizing 
OFMSW depends on a wide variety of 
factors, of which some important ones 
are listed in the following subsections.
 
 
4.1. Role of pH

pH has always been a crucial parameter 

8



in the generation of the biogas by AD of 
OFMSW. Results have shown that a pH 
range of 6.8-7.3 is the most favorable 
for methane-producing bacteria. This 
can be attributed to the fact that on either 
side of the mentioned pH range 
methane production ceases, as acidforming 
bacteria are dominating at lower 
pH (4-5), whereas at a higher pH 
(>7.3) the production of the toxic form 
of ammonia (N[H.sub.3]) is favored (El- 
Fadel et al. 2013). Addition of inoculum 
and dry digestion at higher seed or substrate 
solids ratios, which is essential at 
times, result in these varying unfavorable 
ranges of pH. During instances 
when the pH is not favoring the 
methane-producing bacteria, several pH 
control chemicals (buffers) can be added 
to the AD system to restore pH neutrality. 
Brummeler and Koster (1989) studied 
the effect of several pH control 
chemicals on the dry batch digestion of 
the OFMSW and detected higher stabilization 
in terms of methane generation 
compared to that in sanitary landfills. It 
was also concluded that a start-up phase 
of approximately 6 months yielded 80 L 
C[H.sub.4]/kg of organic fraction. Mata-
Alvarez et al. (1990) made a variety 
of comparisons in digester performances 
treating OFMSW pertaining to 
the biodegradation achieved, process kinetics, 
and biodegradability of the substrate. 
All these factors are related directly 
to the nature of the feed provided, 
which in turn depends largely on the 
way the waste is sorted. 
As such, the biodegradation achieved in 
the case of the SS-OFMSW is greater 
than the mechanically sorted organic 
fraction of municipal solid waste (MSOFMSW). 
MS-OFMSW contains a 
higher fraction of non-biodegradable 
solids, such as plastic pieces, wood, paper, 
etc., resulting in a lower percentage 
of soluble VS with respect to total 
volatile solids (TVS), when compared 
to SS-OFMSW. This in turn causes low 
biogas production rate. Consequently, it 
was observed by Mata-Alvarez et al. 
(1990) that the biodegradation rate, estimated 
through the first-order kinetic 
constant k, was almost 10 times greater 
when the feed was SS-OFMSW. Later, 
in a separate experimental study where 
the AD of food market wastes (Mata- 
Alvarez et al. 1992) was carried out, a 
methane yield of 0.478 [m.sup.3]/kg of 
added VS was reported. In addition, the 
kinetic analysis on the designed reactor 
using a first-order model resulted in a 
kinetic constant of 3.1 [day.sup.-1] and 
an ultimate methane yield of 0.489 
C[H.sub.4]/kg VS. Not only that, the 
leachate produced during the process 
was suitably utilized too.
 
 
4.2. Role of co-digestion 

One of the most classical ways of increasing 
the efficiency of an anaerobic 
digester treating OFMSW is by co-digestion. 
Co-digestion of OFMSW and 
bio-solids provides an attractive alternative 
for the management of two separate 
waste streams that are produced in 
every community (Cecchi et al. 1988). 
As such, the concept of co-digestion of 
OFMSW with manure and other industrial 
organic wastes was successfully 
materialized by Callaghan et al. (1999). 
However, in a separate bench-scale 
study, primary sewage sludge was codigested 
with OFMSW instead of manure 
for substantial biogas production 
(Kiely et al. 1997). Similar co-digestion 
of semisolid organic waste with sewage 
sludge was also investigated by Sharma 
et al. (2000) on a newly designed reactor, 
which showed greater biogas production 
and stabilization. On two separate 
occasions, McMahon et al. (2001) 
and Stroot et al. (2001) studied the digester 
performance and microbial population 
dynamics while conducting 
anaerobic co-digestion of MSW and 
bio-solids under various mixing conditions. 
It was inferred from both the experiments 
that continuous mixing may 
cause an inhibitory effect on the archael 
population dynamics during higher 
OLRs. That was primarily attributed to 
the fact that continuous mixing at a high 
OLR inhibited syntrophic oxidation of 
VFAs thereby resulting in an abrupt reduction 
of the methanogenic abundance. 
Consequently an increased stability in 
the digester performance was noticed by 
reducing the level of mixing. 
A study conducted by Schmit and Ellis 
(2001) showed the comparison between 
temperature-phased and two-phased 
anaerobic co-digestion of primary 
sludge and OFMSW, as substrate, in 
terms of all the key phases (hydrolysis, 
acidogenesis, and methanogenesis). On 
a separate occasion, Hartmann and 
Ahring (2005) reported a study on co-digestion 
of OFMSW with animal manure, 
which showed stable performance 
with a significant amount of methane 
and very low VFA levels. It is obvious 
that the economic feasibility of an AD 
plant treating OFMSW increases with 
higher biogas yield. In the case of an 
AD plant solely depending on OFMSW, 
as its influent substrate, an increase in 
biogas yield can be achieved by co-digesting 
OFMSW with animal manure, 
because of the high biogas potential of 
the animal manure. In a separate experimental 
study, Fernandez et al. (2005) 
evaluated the potential of mesophilic 
AD for the treatment of fats of different 
origin through co-digestion with the 
OFMSW. Fats are generally characterized 
by the presence of lipids, which 
are considered to be important biochem- 

9



ical components for high theoretical 
methane production because of their reduced 
nature (Pereira et al. 2003). Thus 
it can be seen that the benefits of co-digestion 
of OFMSW with another residue 
are well described in several studies 
(Sosnowski et al. 2003; Dohanyos et al. 
2004; Bouallagui et al. 2004). However, 
the application of co-digestion with industrial 
sludge is very much limited. 
Capela et al. (2008) evaluated the technical 
feasibility of anaerobic co-digestion 
of three organic solid wastes under 
mesophilic conditions: OFMSW, industrial 
sludge, and cattle manure. 
Co-digestion of wasted sewage sludge 
(WSS) (WSS can be defined as the 
sludge wasted during secondary treatment 
either from the main aeration unit 
or the secondary clarifier of an activated 
sludge process system) with OFMSW 
has become a popular mode of improving 
the biogas yield and stability of 
anaerobic digesters (Hartmann and 
Ahring 2006; De Baere 2006; Bouallagui 
et al. 2009). Similarly, slaughterhouse 
wastes can also be used as an efficient 
co-substrate in the AD of OFMSW. 
Anaerobic co-digestion of the 
slaughterhouse waste not only provides 
an option for the reduction of such 
harmful wastes, but also provides an alternative 
pathway of extracting the potential 
benefits in terms of biogas generation. 
Hence, it can be said that AD 
of OFMSW using certain co-substrates 
not only serves to enhance the rate of 
methane production and operational stability, 
but also contributes to a low energy 
requirement for operation, a low initial 
investment cost, and a low sludge 
production (Nguyena et al. 2007). In addition, 
the final digested material from 
co-digestion is more stabilized and 
hence serves better as a soil conditioner. 
Alvarez and Liden (2008) experimentally 
evaluated the potential of semi-continuous 
mesophilic AD for the treatment 
of solid slaughterhouse waste, fruit and 
vegetable wastes (FVWs), and manure 
in a co-digestion process. It was observed 
that the digestion of the mixed 
substrates yielded better VS reduction 
and steady-state biogas production than 
with the digestion of the pure substrates, 
with the exception of solid cattle-swine 
slaughterhouse waste with FVW mixture. 
This finding emphasizes the importance 
of combined treatment for certain 
wastes that cannot be successfully treated 
individually. In another study, Cuetos 
et al. (2008) carried out the AD of 
both slaughterhouse waste and mixtures 
of solid slaughterhouse waste with 
OFMSW in a mesophilic semi-continuously 
fed digester. It was observed that 
in a medium with high fat and ammonia 
content (such as slaughterhouse waste) 
the sludge needed to be acclimated 
properly for a certain period of time (initial 
HRT 50 days) for the AD to proceed 
steadily at a subsequently shorter HRT 
and progressively increasing OLR. This 
resulted in a successful co-digestion 
with a better yield and VS removal than 
for co-digestion carried out at an initial 
HRT of 25 days, which led to digester 
failure. A comparative study was carried 
out by Zhang et al. (2008) demonstrating 
the performance difference between 
sole digestion of bio-solids and co-digestion 
of bio-solids and OFMSW. It 
was observed that co-digestion of biosolids 
with OFMSW resulted in increased 
biogas yield and efficient removal 
of VS and TS, along with significant 
reduction in the volume of biosolids 
and OFMSW. 
Nowadays, it can be said that AD is the 
most acceptable technology for the 
treatment of OFMSW, because it is not 
only self-sustaining, but there is a provision 
of energy recovery in the form 
of methane gas (Lv et al. 2010). It also 
has a tremendous potential to stabilize 
a huge quantum of the generated MSW 
(Ge et al. 2010). Co-digestion provides 
a scope for easy stabilization of complex 
and diverse substrates with OFMSW. 
Moreover, the nutritional requirement of 
the inoculum employed is met by means 
of co-digesting OFMSW with various 
other substrates. Ponsa et al. (2011) 
studied the feasibility of co-digesting 
OFMSW with different kinds of pure 
organic co-substrates, such as vegetable 
oil, animal fat, cellulose, and peptone 
(protein). It improved the functioning of 
the anaerobic digesters by increasing the 
biogas yield. Waste-activated sludge has 
been reported to offer better biogas yield 
and increased process stability when codigested 
with OFMSW. It is also imperative 
to consider the influence of OLRs 
on the system stability when OFMSW is 
co-digested with waste-activated sludge. 
Consequently, Liu et al. (2012b) investigated 
the effects of OLR on the performance 
and stability of anaerobic co-digestion 
of municipal biomass waste and 
waste-activated sludge on a pilot-scale 
reactor.
 
 
4.3. Role of sorting techniques and pretreatments 

The substrate concentration is another 
important consideration, as Fernandez et 
al. (2008) analyzed the effect of substrate 
concentration (based on the TS 
contents in the reactor) on the 
mesophilic AD during the start-up 
phase. The higher the initial organic 
substrate concentration (DOC or TS 
concentration) the longer the start-up 
phase, because of prolonged hydrolysis 
and acidogenesis phases, and the lower 
the methane yield. Forster-Carneiro et 

10



al. (2008b) analyzed the performance of 
two laboratory-scale reactors treating 
two types of SS-OFMSW obtained from 
a university restaurant and MS-OFMSW 
obtained from a municipal treatment 
plant located in Cadiz, Spain. SSOFMSW 
was characterized by high 
start-up phase because it followed the 
classical waste decomposition pattern 
(i.e., a first start-up phase followed by 
the acclimation phase, and finally the 
stabilization phase). On the contrary, the 
MS-OFMSW exhibited a methanogenic 
pattern throughout the entire experimental 
period thereby showing no visible 
difference between the acidogenic, acetogenic, 
and methanogenic phases. In 
the case of the MS-OFMSW a lower C/ 
N ratio, which is indispensable for biomass 
growth and diversification, was 
marked. This resulted in a stable pH for 
optimal biological activity until the stabilization 
period. Also, the biodegradability 
of the MS-OFMSW was higher 
because of lower DOC.With the gradual 
advancement in the various design features 
of the AD, it is essential to set a 
benchmark against which the different 
designs can be compared for their benefits, 
constraints, kinetics, and pollution 
potential of the OFMSW. 
It is appropriate to say that AD of OFMSW 
has been considerably boosted by 
various worldwide developments in the 
last 15 years. Dong et al. (2010) developed 
one innovative methodology, 
where the feasibility of methane generation 
from semi-dry mesophilic AD 
of water-sorted organic fraction of municipal 
solid waste (WS-OFMSW) was 
worked out. WS-OFMSW is obtained 
by separating completely mixed MSW 
into different classes of fractions, such 
as the biodegradable fraction, metals, 
heavy materials, plastics, and the combustible 
fraction by the buoyant and 
stink force of water with various machines 
assisting. The biodegradable 
fraction obtained is the WS-OFMSW 
comprising kitchen waste, FVW, garden 
waste, paper waste, etc. The biodegradability 
of the WS-OFMSW is evidently 
greater than the MS-OFMSW and hence 
semi-dry AD of WS-OFMSW under 
mesophilic conditions resulted in a satisfactory 
biogas yield with as high as 66% 
methane content. Pognani et al. (2012) 
assessed the performance of a combined 
anaerobic-aerobic full-scale plant designed 
for the treatment of the SS-OFMSW 
and it was observed from the study 
that during the pretreatment step about 
32% of the initial waste matter was rejected 
without any treatment, decreasing 
the overall biodegradability of the organic 
matter. However, the final compost 
was found to contain 50% of the 
initial nitrogen and 86.4% of the initial 
phosphorus, resulting in a high level of 
stabilization. Novarino and Zanetti 
(2012) studied the effect of "pressure 
extrusion", a mechanical pre-treatment 
process that haas seen recent application 
in treatment plants on AD of OFMSW 
across European countries. This was 
done to separate the undesired fractions 
and to reduce the final OFMSW content 
into a homogenous jam. The addition of 
this extruded OFMSW was done with 
activated sludge, which acted as a diluting 
agent. The result showed that with 
the stepwise increase in the TS content 
rate, the average specific bio-gas production 
(SBP) increased significantly 
per kilogram of VS degraded and the 
percentage of methane, by volume, also 
increased considerably. 
Of late, the application of AD for the 
treatment of the industrial contribution 
of OFMSW has been of special interest. 
Biotransformation has been regarded as 
the main barrier in the treatment of those 
wastes. These industrial contributions of 
MSW along with certain other procured 
MSW sometimes have complex organic 
fractions, which cannot be easily broken 
down via microbial activity. This is especially 
the problem if the digester is 
dedicated to the anaerobic stabilization 
of such complex OFMSW. In such cases 
various pretreatments, such as biological, 
thermal, chemical, and combinations 
of all three may be adopted prior 
to the main AD process (Fdez.-Guelfo 
et al. 2011a, 2011b). The biodegradability 
of the complex substrates can be improved 
by the various aforesaid pretreatments. 
For instance, in the case of cellulose 
fermentation, the hydrolytic phase, 
which is always the rate-limiting step, 
can be enhanced by addition of certain 
extracellular enzymes called hydrolases, 
which catalyze the reactions. 
The pretreatment causes a deep modification 
by weakening the molecular 
bonds in the structure of the complex 
substrates thereby breaking the polymers 
and increasing the superficial area 
of particulate wastes. Biological pretreatment 
ensures breaking of complex 
molecules into simple monomers so that 
the solubilization of the organic material 
is increased and subsequently the efficiency 
of the AD process is bettered, resulting 
in enhanced biogas and methane 
production (Fdez.-Guelfo et al. 2011c). 
Other conventional types of biological 
pretreatment that can be applied to 
OFMSW prior to the main AD include 
aerobic pretreatments, such as composting 
or micro-aeration. These methods 
obtain better hydrolysis of complex substrates 
because of the higher production 
of hydrolytic enzymes. Zhou et al. 
(2013) studied the effect of thermal hydrolysis, 
also a pretreatment, on the 
physical and the chemical properties of 
OFMSW while co-digesting WSS, 

11



restaurant kitchen waste, and FVW in 
a pilot plant. The results indicated that 
thermal hydrolysis increased digestibility 
by as much as 115% by dissolving 
38.3% of the volatile suspended solids 
(VSS). It was also concluded from the 
study that the digestion rate doubled as 
a result of performing the thermal pretreatment, 
with less accumulation of 
VFAs, compared to an AD process without 
the thermal pretreatment. 
From the perspective of an increased 
rate of degradation of the OFMSW, enhanced 
gas production, cost efficiency, 
energy balance, and process sustainability 
(Ariunbaatar et al. 2014) various pretreatment 
techniques, such as that of 
mechanical pre-treatment, thermal pretreatment, 
chemical pre-treatment, and 
biological pre-treatment, play a pivotal 
role. For instance, different mechanical 
pretreatment techniques, such as rotary 
drum, screw press, disc screen shredder, 
FW disposer, piston press, and eletroporation, 
have different impacts on chemical 
oxygen demand (COD) solubilization, 
biogas production, and high 
methane yield per unit weight of VS degraded. 
However, the selection of a particular 
technology depends largely on 
the nature of the OFMSW to be treated. 
This is because each technology has an 
unique impact on the various factors, 
such as particle size, VFA accumulation, 
and quantity as well as quality of the 
sorted OFMSW, that enhance the COD 
solubilization rate, biogas production 
rate, and the percentage of methane 
yield. Earlier, it was established that the 
organic fraction obtained from the waste 
separation was particularly more useful 
for AD than that obtained from mechanical 
separation because of the presence 
of higher TVS content (Bolzonella et 
al. 2001). However, Fantozzi and Buratti 
(2011) evaluated the performance of 
AD on different portions of OFMSW by 
squeezing in the OFMSW with or without 
inoculum via mechanical treatment. 
Similarly, in the case of thermal pretreatment, 
such as thermal hydrolysis, 
the disintegration of cell membranes of 
the complex substrates results in the solubilization 
of the organic compounds 
thereby enhancing the COD solubilization 
rate. Not only that, thermal pretreatment 
of OFMSW results in pathogen removal, 
improvement in dewatering performance, 
and viscosity reduction of the 
digestate. Studies have shown that thermal 
pretreatments of FW and FVW at 
temperatures between 70 and 90 [degrees]
C for 60 min led to a significant 
increase in the biogas production rate 
with high methane yield. However, to 
economize the thermal pretreatment 
technology, the duration of the pretreatment 
has been shortened considerably to 
30-40 min by elevating the temperature 
to 120 from 90 [degrees]C, which also 
resulted in a similar outcome, in terms 
of biogas production rate and methane 
yield. The application of chemical pretreatment 
on OFMSW has been mostly 
by alkaline pretreatment. Studies have 
shown that alkaline pretreatment of 
OFMSW resulted in higher methane 
production. Apart from alkaline pretreatment, 
ozonation pretreatment (Cesaro 
and Belgiorno, 2013) of SS-OFMSW 
has also resulted in a 37% higher 
cumulative methane production.




 
5. Potential of AD of OFMSW 

AD of OFMSW primarily involves a series 
of metabolic reactions (hydrolysis, 
acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and 
methanogenesis) controlled by diverse 
microbial populations to convert or degrade 
the organic waste into biogas and 
other energy-rich organic compounds as 
end products (Charles et al. 2009). In 
other words, the process of anaerobic 
decomposition has the potential to provide 
useful products, such as methane 
and bio-hydrogen, and the sludge generated 
is also used as an organic conditioner 
for soil. Besides these, the process 
of AD does not require external supply 
of oxygen (Guermoud et al. 2009; 
Chanakya et al. 2007) and there is no dependency 
on fossil fuel for energy production 
(Jingura and Matengaifa 2009). 
AD thus represents an opportunity to decrease 
environmental pollution as well 
as producing biogas and organic fertilizer 
or carrier material for bio-fertilizers 
(Khalid et al. 2011). The two major benefits 
of this process that reduce environmental 
pollution are (i) prevention 
of methane exiting into the atmosphere 
because AD occurs under closed conditions; 
and (ii) carbon-neutral carbon 
dioxide is released into the atmosphere 
during the burning of methane (Ward 
et al. 2008). Compared to other MSW 
management techniques, such as sanitary 
landfilling, thermal incineration, 
pyrolysis or gasification, and aerobic 
composting, the numerous potentials of 
AD in treating OFMSW include rapid 
digestion of solid organic waste constituents, 
huge volume reduction of organic 
matter and energy recovery with 
high-grade soil conditioner. In addition, 
the enclosed system also prevents the 
spread of diseases vectors (rodent, fly 
menace) and bad odor. 
It is a well-known fact that AD is preferred 
over aerobic conversion because 
of the lower volume of final solid sludge 
produced. In the last few decades, the 
per-capita solid waste generation rate 
has been increasing mostly in an uncontrolled 
manner, and therefore AD has 
gained much importance. The rapid rate 
of digestion of these huge quanta of gen- 

12



erated waste is making the process of 
AD not only economically viable but also 
environmentally indispensable. Economic 
viability is owed to the fact that 
in the treatment of the solid organic 
waste, virtually no power is required except 
for maintaining the operational 
temperature, which again can be sustained 
by the usage of the generated biogas. 
Thus in a way the AD of OFMSW 
is a self-sustaining process that may be 
needful to prevent the gradual exhaustion 
of fossil fuels. The ability of AD 
to stabilize enormous quanta of solid organic 
waste within a short period facilitates 
substantial reduction of waste volume 
on a daily basis thereby ensuring 
that comparatively smaller areas are required 
forthe final disposal of solid organic 
waste before these are subjected to 
AD. This allows the possibility to eliminate 
unhygienic conditions in cities, especially 
during periods when there is a 
sudden increase in the generation of the 
total organic solid waste load. 
Nowadays, the availability of space for 
sustaining any environmental friendly 
technology is a major issue and the unprecedented 
urbanization coupled with 
the mushroom-like development of suburbs 
hinders this target. This particular 
challenge has also led municipalities to 
look for some pragmatic approaches to 
solid waste management, such as that of 
AD, where the land required for constructing 
a full-scale plant is smaller 
than for other MSW management techniques. 
Anaerobic treatment units require 
modular construction and the area 
required basically depends on the type 
of digester unit to be used. AD of OFMSW 
also has the potential to treat other 
types of wastes in conjunction with the 
solid organic fraction. It follows that 
other kinds of waste like sewage sludge, 
poultry residue, slaughterhouse waste, 
etc., can be mixed with the OFMSW 
to increase the rate of digestion. This 
process, better known as co-digestion or 
co-fermentation, not only ensures a 
faster rate of degradation of the primary 
substrate (OFMSW) but also of the cosubstrate. 
Common benefits of co-digestion 
include easier handling of mixed 
waste (Li et al. 2009), adjustment of the 
C/N ratio (Xie et al. 2011), easy dilution 
of potentially toxic compounds, improved 
nutritional balance, increased 
loads of decomposable organic matter 
(Gannoun et al. 2007; Bouallagui et al. 
2009), and increased gas yield (Macias- 
Corral et al. 2008). The toxic elements 
present in the OFMSW may disrupt the 
AD process. In this regard, co-digestion 
is the most efficient option to overcome 
the problems associated with toxicity of 
certain elements in the OFMSW. Apart 
from that, other potential benefits of 
co-digestion include stabilization of an 
increased load of organic matter, improved 
nutrient balance, better biogas 
yield, and synergistic effect of microbes 
(Khalid et al. 2011). The nutrient requirement 
gets complemented by co-digestion 
of an organic waste that provides 
excess nutrients thereby improving 
the C/N ratio, accelerating biodegradation 
of the solid organic fraction, and 
increasing the digestion and stabilization 
rate. For instance, the use of a cosubstrate 
with a low nitrogen and lipid 
content increases the production of biogas 
because of complementary characteristics 
of both types of waste. This reduces 
problems associated with the accumulation 
of various intermediate 
volatile compounds and high ammonia 
concentrations (Castillo et al. 2006). 
Moreover, co-digestion with sewage 
sludge enables an integrated approach 
allowing the wastewater treatment plant 
to be independent as far as energy is 
concerned (Mata-Alvarez and Cecchi 
1989). Figure 4 represents the various 
co-substrates that can be anaerobically 
co-digested with OFMSW for the production 
of biogas and sludge. 
The potential of AD of OFMSW is also 
envisaged in the domain of energy production. 
The biogas generated from this 
process may greatly complement a society's 
need for energy. Today, the energy 
crisis has affected most parts of the 
world, and the generation of such a renewable 
source of energy is a welcome 
boost to the energy needs of civilizations 
worldwide. The energy produced 
via AD of OFMSW has a wide range of 
applications in both domestic and industrial 
domains. The biogas produced may 
be used in electricity generation, heating 
of furnaces, boilers, and fuel for vehicles. 
Even the sludge produced has a 
nutritional value, making it an effective 
soil conditioner. Instead of costly fertilizers, 
farmers can look forward to using 
this inexpensive organic soil conditioner 
thereby preventing damage to the parent 
soil via the use of certain chemical fertilizers. 
The abundant use of chemical 
fertilizers in modern agricultural practices, 
initiates imbalance in soil nutrients 
and their wash-out via surface 
runoff contaminates aquatic life. Hence, 
it is advisable to use this naturally procured 
soil conditioner as an organic 
amendment for the betterment of and to 
safeguard the overall environment.




 
6. Critical issues in AD of OFMSW 

The stability of an anaerobic digester 
treating OFMSW depends on a number 
of critical issues, which if left unaddressed, 
would possibly result in the 
failure of the digester. The aforementioned 
potentials of the AD of OFMSW 
can be correlated with the smooth and 

13



hassle-free operation of an anaerobic digester 
treating OFMSW, which is a major 
challenge considering the number of 
critical operational issues that need to be 
carefully monitored. Among the number 
of critical operational issues linked 
with the AD of OFMSW, the following 
can be considered most important: (i) 
nature of the seed and inoculum source; 
(ii) operational temperature; (iii) OLR; 
(iv) high solids/low solids digestion; (v) 
mixing condition; (vi) nutrient requirements; 
(vii) pH control; (viii) C/N ratio; 
(ix) retention times; and (x) sorting techniques 
employed for selecting the OFMSW. 
Depending on these critical issues, 
the reactor configuration, pretreatments, 
recirculation strategies, start-up strategies, 
and adoption of co-digestion may 
be adjusted accordingly. In general, the 
performance of an anaerobic digester 
treating OFMSW largely depends on the 
previously mentioned critical issues. 


6.1. Start-up strategies for AD of OFMSW
 
The start-up of an anaerobic digester 
holds the key to its overall performance 
and stability. Once the start-up has been 
made successfully, an anaerobic digester 
is capable of running with minimal attention, 
as long as the steady-state operating 
conditions are not altered significantly 
(Hobson and Wheatley 1993). 
Even though the most crucial issue that 
dictates the start-up of an AD reactor 
is the nature of the seed source, there 
are other important factors, such as the 
mode of giving the feed, the type of the 
reactor, the nature of the feed or substrate, 
the volume of the inoculum 
added, the adaptation of the inoculum 
and the process acclimatization from the 
mesophilic to the thermophilic temperature 
regime.
 
6.1.1. Fundamental requirements 

The start-up of an anaerobic digester is 
mainly dictated by the nature of the inoculum 
chosen. Sometimes the anaerobic 
digesters treating OFMSW may 
have to be started up using inoculum 
that is not acclimated to digesting such 
complex feedstock, resembling OFMSW. 
Under such circumstances, a combination 
of inocula from two different 
anaerobic environments may be used as 
a seed. Anaerobic digesters operated at 
high substrate input are very much 
prone to imbalance in the activities of 
the hydrofytic-fermentative bacteria, the 
proton-reducing acetogenic bacteria, 
and the methanogens (Schink 1988). 
This can be overcome by the use of 
anaerobic sludge from a stable sewage 
sludge digester, which provides a balanced 
combination of fermenters, acetogens, 
and methanogens. Similarly, for 
successful start-up of a thermophilic AD 
reactor, non-availability of a thermophilic 
inoculum may be overcome by 
the use of two different mesophilic inocula 
as seed sludge (Griffin et al. 1998). 
In the case of start-up of a pilot-scale 
CSTR treating a mixture of both SSOFMSW 
and MS-OFMSW, and operated 
under a thermophilic temperature 
regime, the best possible result, in terms 
of specific methane production (SMP), 
was obtained when the start-up of the reactor 
was made at mesophilic temperatures 
and then gradually shifted to the 
thermophilic regime (Bolzonella et al. 
2003). The inoculum type was a combination 
of primary and secondary sludge 
from a wastewater treatment plant. The 
initiation of the feed was done only after 
there was an appreciable drop in the initial 
VFA level (<200 mg/L) and the inoculum 
had been acclimatized at the 
mesophilic temperature regime. Significant 
specific gas production was noticed 
at an OLR of 1 kg TVS/[m.sup.3] 
of reactor per day with an HRT of 15 
days. The changing from mesophilic to 
thermophilic conditions contributed to 
the degradation rate of the organic matter 
and proteins, causing an increase in 
the buffer capacity (Poggi-Varaldo et al. 
1997a). In another study conducted by 
Angelidaki et al. (2006) it was concluded 
that the start-up of a thermophilic 
CSTR treating SS-OFMSW and other 
high-strength substrates can be successfully 
made by the selection of a thermophilic 
inoculum and the progressive 
increase in the inoculum loading rate. 
The importance of obtaining inoculum 
adapted to the same temperature regime 
or within [+ or -]10 [degrees]C of the intended 
start-up process temperature was 
inferred from the study. The main reason 
for procuring inoculum adapted to [+ or 
-]10 [degrees]C of the intended start-up 
process temperature is the development 
and retention of high concentrations of 
active biomass content inside the reactor. 
This is especially important for thermophilic 
processes because mesophilic 
sludge has been reported to contain only 
9% thermophiles and 1% obligate-thermophiles 
(Chen 1983). The progressive 
increase in the inoculum loading rate 
and the subsequent ratio of low substrate 
concentration to constant inoculum volume 
can be attributed to the fact that 
the complete anaerobic degradation of 
the organic solids with high specific 
methane yield can be achieved without 
the accumulation of inhibiting levels of 
intermediate anaerobic degradation 
products. In other words, the initial lowfeeding 
strategy ensures a gradual balance 
between the various anaerobic 
degradation steps, which is necessary to 
develop sufficient microbial degradation 
capacity, thereby avoiding any possible 

14



VFA accumulation. Another reason for 
optimizing the low initial amount of 
fresh organic feed relative to the inoculum 
amount during start-up is due to the 
nature of the conventional digester type 
like CSTR, where the acidogenesis and 
methanogenesis phases occur together. 
In the absence of classical inoculum, the 
start-up of a mesophilic anaerobic digester, 
treating SS-OFMSW, can be successfully 
carried out by the right selection 
of one or two different inocula and 
subjecting them to chemical and microbiological 
characterization. The importance 
of subjecting the inoculum to 
chemical and microbiological characterization 
is related to the need to determine 
the presence of microflora in the 
inoculum and assess their methanogenic 
activity before they are used. As such, it 
was observed from the study conducted 
by Maroun and El Fadel (2007) that during 
the start-up of an anaerobic digester 
(CSTR) treating SS-OFMSW, high initial 
levels of ammonia and VFA were 
exhibited at inhibitory levels, which restricted 
the increase of the OLR. However, 
this was overcome by the dilution 
of the reactor content with mineral water 
and re-inoculation with enriched cattle 
manure (representing an appropriate 
source of methanogens), which resulted 
in the increase of the OLR by 116%.

6.1.2. Classical issues related with startup 

Even though it is stated in the literature 
that a gradual increase in the OLR results 
in a high methane production rate, 
the overall TS content of the feed plays 
a very important role in the start-up of 
an anaerobic digester and the rate of 
methane production. Based on the TS 
content of solid organic waste, there are 
three types of AD technology: wet 
process ([less than or equal to]10% TS), 
semi-dry process (10%-20% TS), and 
dry process ([greater than or equal 
to]20% TS). It has been observed from 
various studies that, with an increase in 
TS content above 30%, the methane 
production rate decreases significantly 
when compared to the semi-dry AD 
process (Fernandez et al. 2008; Forster- 
Carneiro et al. 2008c). This is mainly 
due to reduced substrate degradation 
rate and accumulation of intermediate 
products (VFA mainly). However, this 
can be overcome by significantly increasing 
the moisture content of the feed 
by: (i) increasing the moisture content 
from 65% to 82% corresponding to a 
feed with TS 35%, leading to a linear increase 
in the specific methanogenic activity 
by a factor of 3.5 (Le Hyaric et al. 
2011); (ii) gradually acclimatizing the 
methanogens to a feed with high TS 
content (in excess of 30%), following 
start-up with an inocula from an anaerobic 
digester, which has reached a steady 
state condition even after being subjected 
to shock-loadings. 
It was inferred from a study conducted 
by Abbassi-Guendouz et al. (2012) that 
with the increase in TS content, the firstorder 
hydrolysis rate decreases. The 
first-order rate of hydrolysis, a limiting 
step in an AD process, was required to 
be reduced to explain the cumulative 
methane production rate corresponding 
to a few experiments, which were uninhibited 
by high VFA concentrations and 
low pH at 30% TS. 
The mass-transfer rate, which depends 
on the texture of the substrate-biomass 
mixture and the solid-liquid or -gas interface, 
decreases with an increase in the 
TS content. This can be attributed to the 
fact that with the increase in the TS content 
there is an increase in the viscosity 
of the substrate-biomass mixture, which 
causes a pasty texture and a decrease in 
the porosity (water content) of the solidliquid 
or -gas interface, leading to low 
biogas bubble generation. Thus the volumetric 
liquid or gas mass-transfer coefficient, 
[k.sub.I] (which was equivalent 
to [k.sub.L] a in the study), depends on 
[k.sub.L] (the mass transfer coefficient) 
and a (the specific surface area). It was 
also determined from a study conducted 
by Abbassi-Guendouz et al. (2012) 
that the methane production rate was not 
influenced by the overall mass transfer 
above a critical [k.sub.T] value and that 
the cumulative methane production remained 
almost constant independent of 
the [k.sub.T]. value. However, below 
the critical [k.sub.T] value, limited overall 
mass transfer considerably lowered 
the cumulative methane production rate. 
At high TS (30%-35%) content, the 
overall mass transfer limitation was due 
to the accumulation of inorganic carbon 
(C[O.sub.2]), dissolved methane, and 
dissolved hydrogen. The inorganic carbon 
produced during methanogenes got 
entrapped in the matrix at high TS content, 
due to the low release of dissolved 
compounds in the digestate. As a result, 
the C[O.sub.2] accumulation in the matrix 
increased, leading to local acidification 
and subsequent inhibition of 
methanogenesis from the start-up phase 
implicating VFA accumulation. The accumulation 
of dissolved hydrogen also 
caused inhibition of valerate, butyrate, 
and propionate degradation, resulting in 
overall VFA accumulation (Lovely et al. 
1982; Ahring and Westermann 1988; 
Fukuzaki et al. 1990). Hence, the produced 
hydrogen was also required to be 
consumed locally or removed from the 
liquid phase through liquid or gas mass 
transfer (Vavilin et al. 1995). 

6.1.3. Selection criteria for seed source 

15



As highlighted previously, the start-up 
of an anaerobic digester treating OFMSW 
depends on numerous factors. However, 
it can be inferred from the preceding 
discussions that the seed source 
continues to be the most crucial aspect 
in the start-up of an anaerobic digester 
treating OFMSW, because the correct 
composition of bacteria in the seedsource 
is mainly essential for the stability 
of the reactor following start-up. 
In fact, the seed source must contain a 
well-balanced supply of the following 
classes of microorganisms: 
1. Fermentative group of bacteria, which 
are capable of carrying out the process 
of hydrolysis by degrading the macromolecular 
products (lipids, carbohydrates/
polysaccharides, proteins, nucleic 
acids) to soluble or simple monomers 
(fatty acids, sugars/monosaccharides, 
amino acids/long-chain fatty acids, 
purines and pyrimidines) (Metcalf and 
Eddy Inc. 2003). 
2. A group of fermentative bacteria, 
which are responsible for carrying out 
the process of acidogenesis, whereby 
the soluble or simple monomers (amino 
acids, sugars, some fatty acids), produced 
via hydrolysis, are fermented further 
to [H.sub.2], C[O.sub.2], VFAs, 
formate, propionate, butyrate, pyruvate, 
alcohols, ketones, lactic acid, etc. (Metcalf 
and Eddy Inc. 2003). 
3. Acetogens, which are responsible for 
converting the VFAs, alcohols, formate, 
propionate, butyrate, etc., to hydrogen, 
C[O.sub.2], and acetate. These acetogens 
are known as obligate 
[H.sub.2]producing acetogens. 
4. Homoacetogens, which are capable 
of carrying out homo acetogenesis by 
reduction of C[O.sub.2] with [H.sub.2] 
to acetate via the acetyl-CoA pathway 
(2C[O.sub.2] + 4[H.sub.2] [right arrow] 
C[H.sub.3]COOH + 2[H.sub.2]O) 
(Diekert and Wohlfarth 1994; Drake et 
al. 2008). 
5. Methanogens, which are acetoclastic 
methanogens, which convert acetic acid 
to C[O.sub.2] and C[H.sub.4] and hydrogenotrophic 
methanogens, that utilize 
[H.sub.2] as the electron donor and 
C[O.sub.2] as the electron acceptor to 
produce C[H.sub.4] (Metcalf and Eddy 
Inc. 2003). 
Apart from these classes of microorganisms, 
which can be considered as the 
most important and fundamental groups 
of bacteria necessary for the start-up of 
any anaerobic digester, the seed must also 
contain various syntrophs, such as nitrate 
and sulfate reducing bacteria, and 
propionate, acetate, lactate oxidizing 
bacteria. 
Depending on the nature of the operational 
temperature regime opted for, the 
seed has to be procured. However, because 
the number of thermophilic digester 
systems under operation is much 
lower than the number of mesophilic digester 
systems, the start-up of a thermophilic 
anaerobic digester system can 
be made with mesophilic seeds (i.e., 
mesophilic anaerobic sludge). This is attributed 
to the fact that mesophilic 
anaerobic sludge hosts a large diversity 
of anaerobes that can be effective for 
start-up under thermophilic conditions 
as well (Fernandez et al. 2008; Gallert 
and Winter 1997). 
Methanogens are obligate anaerobes 
that cannot tolerate [O.sub.2] because 
they are unable to form protective 
spores in unfavorable environments 
(Valdez-Vazquez et al. 2009). However, 
methanogens can be found in oxic conditions 
(Liu and Conrad 2010), such as 
those prevailing in landfill leachate, 
soils, manure (raw, dried, and aged), 
compost, primary and secondary sludge 
from activated sludge process systems, 
and waste-activated sludge. Hence, the 
preceding sources can be used for inoculating 
anaerobic digesters. Cattle manure, 
waste-activated sludge, sludge 
from ASP systems are found to contain 
acetotrophic methanogens, hydrogenotrophic 
methanogens, and syntrophs, 
which are essential for the startup 
of an anaerobic digester system. In 
the case of compost, the process of composting 
at 60 [degrees]C and above enables 
the thermo-tolerant methanogens 
(present in the aerated compost) to carry 
out exothermal aerobic respiration, 
thereby increasing their numbers. They 
remain in anoxic niches during the thermophilic 
phase. Hence, during the startup, 
the purpose of proper seeding can 
thus be satisfied by filling up the reactor 
using an equal volume of a mesophilic 
or thermophilic seed and either of the 
previously mentioned inocula. 


6.2. Operational temperature selection 

An AD system treating OFMSW can either 
be operated under a mesophilic 
temperature regime (30-38 [degrees]C) 
or a thermophilic temperature regime 
(49-57 [degrees]C), depending on the 
extent or the need for biogas production. 
It is well known that an AD system operating 
under a thermophilic temperature 
regime has a higher processing rate 
and superior biogas production rate, 
thereby enabling the use of smaller digestion 
units compared to an AD system 
operated under a mesophilic temperature 
regime, provided all the critical operational 
parameters are addressed properly. 
In addition, an AD system oper- 

16



ating under a thermophilic temperature 
regime has several other advantages 
over a system operating under 
mesophilic temperature regime, such as 
provision for the selection of a high 
OLR, higher VS and COD removal 
rates, resistance to foaming, and superior 
destruction of pathogens (Mao et 
al. 2015). Moreover, thermophilic AD is 
characterized by a significantly higher 
hydrolysis rate (the rate limiting step in 
the AD process), which is especially notable 
when working with wastes with 
high solid content, such as OFMSW (Li 
et al. 2015). However, there are also 
several disadvantages, such as slow 
start-up and instability of the reactor 
system. The instability of the reactor 
system may arise out of lack of acclimated 
seeds, which is evident in the case 
of thermophilic anaerobic digester systems. 
Another reason for the reactor instability 
may be accumulation of various 
intermediate products (alcohols, VFAs), 
which necessitates long recovery periods 
(Rastogi et al. 2008), resulting in 
eventual system failure. Other problems 
associated with thermophilic AD in 
comparison to mesophilic AD include 
higher sensitivity to operational conditions, 
decreased stability due to ammonia 
and VFA (especially propionic) accumulation, 
poor quality of the supernatant, 
lower methane content in biogas, 
and higher net energy input (Song et al. 
2004). 
Another major problem associated with 
a thermophilic AD system treating 
OFMSW is the accumulation of propionic 
acid. This can be explained from 
the perspective of protein degradation, 
which is greater at thermophilic temperatures 
than mesophilic temperatures, 
leading to generation of higher ammonium 
([NH.sub.4.sup.+]-N) concentration 
(Ariunbaatar et al. 2015). The ammonium 
ions (N[H.sub.4.sup.+]) and free 
unionized ammonia (N[H.sub.3]) ions 
in an anaerobic solution are present in 
chemical equilibrium, thereby forming 
total ammoniacal nitrogen (TAN). This 
equilibrium between ammonium and 
free ammonia is dictated by pH and temperature 
of the system. It was observed 
by several researchers that higher concentrations 
of ammonium ions in TAN 
reduce the activities of the propionic 
acid utilizing anaerobes leading to propionic 
acid accumulation (Angelidaki 
and Ahring 1993; Banks et al. 2012). 
TAN is required to be present in an adequate 
amount to provide buffer capacity 
and meet nutritional requirements for 
the methanogens. In a study conducted 
by El-Hadj et al. (2009) it was inferred 
that during AD of OFMSW the production 
of methane was inhibited by as 
much as 50% when the free ammonia 
(N[H.sub.3]) concentration was 215 mg/ 
L under mesophilic conditions and 468 
mg/L under thermophilic conditions. 
The concentration of ammonium ion 
(N[H.sub.4.sup.+]-N) was found to be 
3860 mg/L under mesophilic conditions 
and 5600 mg/L under thermophilic conditions 
to cause similar inhibition of 
methane production. However, El-Hadj 
et al. (2009) also inferred that an optimum 
pH value of around 7 was found 
throughout the mesophilic condition independent 
of the TAN concentrations, 
whereas during the thermophilic condition, 
a TAN concentration of higher than 
1331 mg/L resulted in an optimum pH 
of 7.5, but when the TAN concentration 
was below or equal to 1331 mg/L, the 
optimum pH was in the range 7-8. 
The availability of a higher number of 
mesophilic digester systems substantiates 
the selection of a mesophilic temperature 
regime (Kim and Speece 2002; 
Suwannoppadol et al. 2011). However, 
if a thermophilic temperature regime is 
opted for, it has to be ensured that the 
operational temperature never exceeds 
60 [degrees]C, as this may cause the inhibition 
of propionate degradation and 
the inhibition of hydrolysis. Also, if 
thermo-tolerant mesophiles are used for 
seeding there has to be a gradual increase 
in the temperature profile during 
the start-up phase. 
Apart from the thermophilic and the 
mesophilic AD systems, another relatively 
new technology developed at 
Iowa State University (Schmit and Ellis 
2001), is the temperature-phased anaerobic 
digestion (TPAD), which basically 
combines the advantages of thermophilic 
and mesophilic processes 
while managing to avoid the disadvantages 
of each one. This consists of a 
short (SRT of 1-3 days) thermophilic 
pre-treatment stage followed by a second 
mesophilic stage, operated with a 
longer retention time. The thermophilic 
stage enhances the hydrolysis and the 
acidogenesis rates, which are considered 
to be the rate-limiting steps in the AD 
process, whereas the mesophilic stage 
provides stable conditions for syntrophic 
acetogenesis and methanogenesis. In 
other words, the thermophilic stage in 
TPAD promotes hydrolysis and the 
mesophilic stage ensures the stability of 
the system by lessening the risk of inhibition 
due to the accumulation of ammonia 
and VFA. The thermophilic stage in 
TPAD can be operated at either acidic or 
neutral pH. At acidic pH, the hydrolysis 
and the acidogenesis stages are favored 
inhibiting the methanogenesis stage, 
whereas at neutral pH, a dynamic balance 
between hydrolysis or acidogenesis 
and methanogenesis is achieved. The 
subsequent mesophilic stage is thus used 
as a polishing stage eliminating the disadvantages 
of thermophilic digestion 

17



and facilitating the production of 
methane at both acidic and neutral pH 
stages (Lv et al. 2010, 2013). The concatenation 
of the two temperature systems 
allows a relatively faster process, 
resulting in enhanced degradation of the 
OFMSW, (feedstock) leading to a 
greater yield in biogas. 
Even though the TPAD system has been 
mainly applied in the stabilization of 
municipal sewage sludge, there have 
been occasions where the technology 
has been found to be effective in treating 
FW (Chu et al. 2008; H.W. Kim et al. 
2011) and OFMSW, as well (Schmit and 
Ellis 2001). In a study conducted by 
Borowski (2015) the TPAD system was 
applied in the treatment of a mixture 
of municipal sewage sludge and hydromechanically 
separated OFMSW, which 
resulted in a methane yield of 333 L 
C[H.sub.4]/kg VS and 52.1% VS reduction, 
compared to a single-stage 
mesophilic process treating the same 
waste, which showed a methane yield 
of 230 L C[H.sub.4]/kg VS and VS removal 
of 37.23%. As mentioned before, 
the thermophilic stage of the TPAD system 
was chosen to be operated at a 
shorter SRT of 1 day followed by the 
mesophilic stage at an SRT of 14 days. It 
was observed from the study that when 
the thermophilic stage of the TPAD system 
was operated at an SRT of 2 days 
instead of 1 day, the methane production 
in the subsequent mesophilic reactor 
was inhibited by high amounts of free 
ammonia, which were liberated in the 
supernatant because of greater intensity 
of protein degradation under prolonged 
exposure of the feedstock to the thermophilic 
temperature. It was also observed 
that high VFA concentrations, 
with predominant propionic acid, also 
contributed to the inhibition of methanogenesis, 
when the SRT was kept high 
during the thermophilic stage. The need 
for a longer SRT for the mesophilic 
stage in a TPAD system was asserted in 
another study carried out by Fernandez- 
Rodriguez et al. (2016). It was observed 
that under SRT of 3 and 6 days for thermophilic 
and mesophilic stages, respectively, 
the yield of methane was lower 
and the organic matter removal was also 
lower than when the TPAD was run 
at an SRT of 4 and 10 days for the same, 
during semi-continuous TPAD of OFMSW 
coming from a MBT plant. However, 
at both sets of SRT the TPAD system 
showed better performance than the 
single-reactor systems at similar SRTs, 
while treating OFMSW coming from an 
MBT. 
It can be concluded from this discussion 
that a multi-stage (preferably a threestage) 
anaerobic digester may be not only 
economical but also appropriate. It is 
well-known that in terms of the operational 
temperature, the methanogens favor 
higher temperatures, in the range of 
30-38 [degrees]C (for mesophilic operations) 
and 49-57 [degrees]C (for thermophilic 
operations), for increased 
methane production. In a single-staged 
system with large digesters, the energy 
required for elevating temperatures, as 
mentioned, is often greater than the energy 
produced, thereby making it uneconomical. 


6.3. OLR 

The OLR depends on numerous factors, 
such as the nature of the substrate, type 
of digestion (wet or dry) and reactor 
configuration (single-stage or multistage). 
For instance, highly biodegradable 
substrates (such as FW) account for 
rapid degradation, thereby resulting in 
the production of VFA and other intermediate 
products within a very short 
time. This causes a decrease in pH below 
6.8 resulting in reactor instability. 
Apart from that, foaming also occurs because 
of propionate accumulation 
adding to the reactor instability. A low 
OLR, during the start-up phase, ensures 
complete degradation of the accumulated 
products. The OLR should only be 
increased gradually after pH, alkalinity, 
and other important operational parameters 
are stabilized (such as VFA < 300 
mg/L as C[H.sub.3]COOH, COD removal 
above 70% or when the 
C[H.sub.4] content in the biogas is 60%) 
(Poggi-Varaldo and Oleszkiewicz 1992; 
Poggi-Varaldo et al. 1997b). Similarly, 
if wet digestion (3%-6% TS content) is 
adopted, the OLR could be kept high 
and if dry digestion (TS content > 15% 
of the substrate input) is adopted, the 
OLR has to be kept low. 
Reactor configuration also plays a vital 
role in determining the OLR. Singlestage 
reactor treating highly biodegradable 
wastes needs to be operated at low 
OLR. This is because the highly 
biodegradable wastes mostly comprise 
up to 75% sugars and hemicelluloses 
and 15% recalcitrant (lignin and cellulose). 
This composition results in the 
rapid production of VFAs, necessitating 
a low OLR to avoid reactor instability. 
The need to lower the OLR can again 
be attributed to the sharp drop in pH, 
arising from high VFA production. The 
rate of acidogenesis being greater than 
the rate of methanogenesis results in the 
destruction of the VFAs by the 
methanogens very slowly (Bouallagui et 
al. 2005; Ward et al. 2008). Thus it can 
be inferred that a high OLR can only 
be employed if the reactor configuration 
is multi-staged, so that the process of 
methanogenesis is not hampered by 
VFA accumulation. 

18



6.4. Type of digestion 

Generally there are two types of digestion 
that can be employed in an anaerobic 
digester system. They are dry digestion, 
also known as high-solids digestion, 
and wet digestion, also known 
as low-solids digestion. Wet digestion is 
defined as the presence of 3%-6% (or 
less than 15%) TS in the substrate input, 
whereas dry digestion is defined as the 
presence of more than 20% TS in the input 
substrate. However, the Theological 
behavior of solid organic wastes classifies 
AD into three types, with semi-dry 
AD being the intermediate one. Hence, 
in a broader perspective it can be said 
that wet AD is classified as [less than 
or equal to]10% TS content in the substrate, 
semi-dry AD is classified as 
10%-20% TS in the substrate, and dry 
AD is classified as [greater than or equal 
to]20% TS content in the substrate (Abbassi-
Guendouz et al. 2012). The selection 
of the digestion type depends on 
the nature of the substrate, operational 
temperature, and reactor configuration. 
For instance, highly biodegradable substrates 
(FWs) necessitate wet digestion, 
because the large fraction of carbohydrates 
results in the production of a high 
concentration of VFAs, which gets removed 
by the methanogens very slowly 
(i.e., the rate of VFA production is 
greater than the rate of VFA destruction). 
However, in the case of a multistaged 
reactor system, where hydrolysis, 
acidogenesis, and methanogenesis occur 
in separate chambers, dry digestion can 
be adopted even if the substrate is highly 
biodegradable, because the accumulated 
VFAs never interfere with the methanogenesis. 
The operational temperature regime also 
plays a role in determining the type of 
digestion. A system employing a thermophilic 
temperature regime has a high 
OLR, which means it can opt for highsolids 
digestion. However, systems employing 
a mesophilic temperature 
regime can also opt for high-solids digestion 
provided wet digestion is selected 
during the start-up phase and continued 
until the digester system is stabilized 
(i.e., the digestion system reaches 
a steady state condition) (Bolzonella et 
al. 2003). 


6.5. Mixing 

One of the most crucial operational factors 
that influences the performance of 
an AD system involving stabilization of 
OFMSW is mixing. The impact of mixing 
on the digester performance depends 
largely on the intensity and the mode of 
employing the mixing operation. Proper 
mixing is important for the homogenization 
of the waste, the interaction between 
the nutrients, and the viable bacteria 
population, uniform heat distribution, 
improved retention (SRT and HRT) 
times, the efficient dispersion of metabolic 
waste, the degradation of the accumulated 
propionate, and pathogen removal 
(El-Fadel et al. 2013). Apart from 
these, mixing also reduces the particle 
size by shear forces, thereby increasing 
the waste surface area. Hydrolysis, 
which is a rate-limiting step, gets enhanced 
as a result of increase in waste 
surface area, because the accessibility 
of the substrates inside the reactor increases 
(Halalsheh et al. 2011). Effective 
mixing also results in the inactivation 
of dead-zones, thereby minimizing 
channeling. In the absence of mixing, 
there is a reduction in the effective digester 
volume by up to 60%. The degradation 
of accumulated propionate results 
in improved reactor stability. 
Even though it is seen that mixing is one 
of the critical issues in dictating the stability 
and consistency of an AD system, 
and that the performance of AD system 
treating OFMSW gets improved by 
employing the mixing operation, there 
are also considerable debates surrounding 
the various problems associated with 
the mixing operation. The absence of 
mixing during the starting up of a reactor 
shortens the start-up period. Interrupted 
mixing leads to formation of hydraulic 
dead-zones, thereby reducing the 
HRT and adversely affecting the reaction 
kinetics. The most common problem 
associated with mixing is that it increases 
the distance between syntrophic 
partners and destroys their associations 
(McMahon et al. 2001; Stroot et al. 
2001). The degradation of organic acids, 
alcohols, propionate, butyrate, valerate, 
etc., is due to close microbial proximity 
of less than 10 [micro]m, and mixing increases 
the distance between syntrophic 
partners. For the production of [H.sub.2] 
and formate, the [H.sub.2] partial pressure 
should be less than [10.sup.-4] atm. 
The acidogenic bacteria functions at 
[H.sub.2] partial pressure of less than 
[10.sup.-4] atm, which is only possible 
if the hydrogenotrophic bacteria converts 
the [H.sub.2] and C[O.sub.2] to 
[CH.sub.4]. In the absence of mixing, 
the microbial proximity remains less 
than 10 [micro]m, thereby facilitating 
the transfer of [H.sub.2], C[O.sub.2], 
and acetate to their consumers (the hydrogenotrophic 
and the acetoclastic 
methanogens). This prevents the accumulation 
of propionate, which is degraded 
by the acidogens. The acidogens 
can survive at [H.sub.2] partial pressure 
of less than [10.sup.-4] atm (Batstone et 
al. 2004). 
The strategy of recirculation over mixing 
also seems advantageous. Studies 
show that AD systems employing re- 

19



circulation of slurry have better performances 
than those employing mechanical 
mixing by impellers (Karim et al. 
2005), which are difficult to maintain. 
Recirculation has a negligible effect in 
systems operating at low solids content. 
Recirculation of leachate (El-Mashad et 
al. 2003) also enhances the performance 
of an AD system, because it enables the 
transportation of VFAs from acidogenic 
pockets (fresh substrates) to 
methanogenic pockets (seeds) (Veeken 
and Hamelers 2000). 


6.6. Nutrient requirements 

For the smooth functioning of an AD 
system, the microbes are needed to be 
supplemented with various macro- and 
micro-nutrients along with trace elements. 
This is because certain substrates 
lack the necessary nutrients required for 
the stable operation of the AD system. 
For instance, vegetable waste lacks sufficient 
cobalt concentration (Jiang et al. 
2011); hence it has to be compensated 
by the external addition of cobalt. However, 
in certain cases even if the nutrients 
are present, they become inaccessible 
to the microbes because of various 
hindrances. For instance, sulfide precipitation 
reduces the availability of iron, 
cobalt, nickel, etc. (Barber and Stuckey 
2000), which are essential nutrients for 
the methanogens. The digestion procedure 
(mono or co-digestion) employed, 
along with the nature of the substrate to 
be digested and the digester type, also 
dictates the extent of the trace element 
supplementation (Demirel and Scherer 
2011). If the performance of an anaerobic 
digester is poor without any obvious 
reason, it should be checked for certain 
trace elements, the deficiency of which 
may be a major problem. 
It was reported in a study by Lane 
(1984) that lab-scale mesophilic AD using 
a trace solution containing Fe, Zn, 
Mn, Cu, and Mo resulted in organic 
solids conversion ranging from 88% to 
96% and a methane yield between 50% 
and 65%. More recently, a comprehensive 
study was carried out by Kayhanian 
and Rich (1995) exploring the addition 
of both micro- and macro-nutrients to 
OFMSW undergoing a thermophilic pilot-
scale AD. It was observed that the 
addition of various macro-nutrients, 
such as Co, Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, Se, W, and 
Zn, resulted in an elevated rate of gas 
production by 30%, along with increased 
digester stability. It was inferred 
that obtaining digester stability was primarily 
on account of supplementation of 
both macro- (N, K, P, and S) and micro-
nutrients (trace metals). The addition 
of trace metals, such as Co, Ni, Mo, 
B, Se, and W was investigated by Feng 
et al. (2010) in a lab-scale AD of food 
industry residues. It was observed that 
the addition of high concentrations of 
Se or W and low level Co resulted in 
the highest production of methane. The 
concentration ranges of Se and W after 
addition varied from 0.008 to 0.8 mg/ 
L and 0.018 to 1.80 mg/L, respectively, 
whereas the Co concentration ranged 
between 0.06 and 6 mg/L. In a separate 
study by Lo et al. (2012) the effects of 
eight different metals, namely, Ca, Cr, 
Ni, Co, Mo, W, Zn, and K were investigated 
on the AD of OFMSW under 
mesophilic conditions. Consequently, it 
was observed that there was enhanced 
biogas production due to the addition of 
Ca, Cr, Ni, Co, Mo, andW, with concentrations 
in the range of 728-1461 mg/L, 
0.0022-0.0212 mg/L, 0.801-5.362 mg/ 
L, 0.148-0.580 mg/L, 0.044-52.94 mg/ 
L, and 0.658-40.39 mg/L, respectively. 
However, the addition of K and Zn did 
not show any enhancement in biogas 
production. On the other hand, it was 
also observed that, with the exception 
of Mo and W, inhibitory concentrations 
I[C.sub.50] of Ca, K, Cr, Ni, Zn, and Co 
were 3252, 2097, 0.124, 7.239, 0.482, 
and 8.625 mg/L, respectively. Above all, 
the study by Lo et al. (2012) inferred 
that the addition of the eight spiked metals 
resulted in their adsorption by the 
OFMSW to a different extent, thereby 
causing different liquid metal levels, potential 
stimulation, and inhibition on AD 
of OFMSW. 
Climenhaga and Banks (2008a) inferred 
that during bench-scale AD of source 
separated food residues (FVW, cooked 
foods including meats and fried foods, 
peelings, bones, and fat trimmings) at a 
constant OLR and varied HRT levels of 
25, 50, and 100 days, the regular addition 
of micro-nutrients provided stable 
digestion, which was otherwise absent. 
This study also concluded that the presence 
of heavy metals in the feedstock 
may not have been bioavailable for the 
methanogens for various reasons. As 
mentioned earlier, various heavy metals, 
despite being present in the feedstock, 
become inaccessible to the methanogens 
because they get precipitated by sulfides. 
In some cases, long-chain fatty 
acids may also bind with minerals, such 
as calcium, making them inaccessible to 
methanogens. In a separate study by Kumar 
et al. (2006) it was concluded that 
when certain heavy metals, such as Ni, 
Zn, and Cd, were added at concentrations 
of 2.5 mg/L to an AD reactor treating 
potato waste and cattle manure, 
there was enhanced biogas production. 
However, the biogas production was accessible 
for only a very short period because 
the pH of the substrate decreased 
to a toxic level after 2-3 days of AD after 
which it was not possible to recover 
it. 

20



Mostly methanogenic bacteria present 
in pure cultures use [H.sub.2] and 
C[O.sub.2] as growth substrates. However, 
Methanosarcina barkeri has been 
reported to use methanol and acetate in 
addition to [H.sub.2] and C[O.sub.2]. 
Among the vast group of highly specialized 
methanogenic bacteria 
Methanosarcina barkeri seemed to be 
the most versatile with respect to the 
number of substrates utilized. This is attributed 
to the fact that it not only grows 
chemoautotrophically on [H.sub.2] plus 
C[O.sub.2], but also chemoorganotrophically 
on methanol, methylamine, dimethylamine, 
trimethylamine or acetate 
as carbon and energy sources (Schnellen 
1947; Kluyver and Schnellen 1947; 
Hippe et al. 1979). It was reported in 
a study by Mountfort and Asher (1979) 
that M. barkeri has a specific physiological 
requirement for sulfide. Later on, 
Scherer and Sahm (1981) observed that 
M. barkeri was dependent on cobalt 
when grown in a defined medium with 
methanol, as energy and carbon source. 
In the absence of cobalt M. barkeri grew 
only very slowly compared with growth 
on the medium containing 1 [micro]mol/ 
L Co[Cl.sub.2]. Moreover, Scherer and 
Sahm (1981) demonstrated that the addition 
of 0.5 [micro]mol/L molybdenum 
was stimulatory to growth under those 
conditions. They also observed that the 
growth of M. barken was significantly 
stimulated by the addition of nickel and 
selenium to the culture medium. 
Another important methanogenic bacterium 
is Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum. 
However, unlike M. barkeri, 
the growth of M. thermoautotrophicum 
depends on [H.sub.2] and 
C[O.sub.2] as the sole energy and carbon 
sources. It was observed by Zeikus 
and Wolfe (1972) that N[H.sub.3] and 
[H.sub.2]S were used by M. thermoautotrophicum 
as nitrogen and sulfur 
sources. In addition, Taylor and Pirt 
(1977) observed the growth of the bacterium 
to be dependent on iron. In a later 
study by Schonheit et al. (1979) it was 
observed that the formation of M. thermoautotrophicum 
was proportional to 
the addition of Ni, Co, and Mo into the 
medium. Interestingly, Schonheit et al. 
(1979) observed that the cell proliferation 
of the M. thermoautotrophicum was 
dependent on nickel, which is generally 
not an essential element for bacterial 
growth. The dependency on cobalt did 
not indicate the presence of corrinoids, 
which are synthesized by cobalt, in the 
bacterium. This was because the added 
transition metal was also a component 
of transcarboxylase (Northrop and 
Wood 1969). 
The presence of trace metals as micronutrients 
is crucial for an anaerobic reactor 
stabilizing solid organic waste. In 
the absence of these elements, there may 
be poor process efficiency and eventually 
reactor failure. However, the presence 
of those elements above certain concentrations 
poses difficulties for the 
methanogenic bacteria to function properly. 
For instance, in a study by Ashley 
et al. (1982) it was shown that dissolved 
concentrations of nickel greater than 1 
mg/L caused inhibition of methanogenesis 
during AD of sewage sludge. Bhattacharya 
et al. (1995) demonstrated that 
in a medium containing acetate-utilizing 
methanogenic enrichment culture, complete 
inhibition of methanogenesis was 
caused by the presence of 70 mg/L of 
free cobalt and 280 mg/L of total soluble 
cobalt, respectively. Also, free cobalt to 
VSS ratio exceeding 0.05 and total soluble 
cobalt to VSS ratio exceeding 0.16, 
caused complete failure of methanogenesis. 
Earlier, studies found that various 
heavy metals, such as zinc, nickel, and 
cadmium were much more toxic to 
methanogenesis from acetate compared 
to nickel (Lin 1992; Leslie 1991; Akanbi 
1990). 
It can be said that the source of the 
MSW plays a key role in determining 
the heavy metal content of the OFMSW 
undergoing AD. As such, the total absence 
of heavy metals can prove to be 
detrimental to the growth of microbes 
involved in AD (Abbasi and Ramasami 
1999). Hence, the addition of micro- and 
macronutrients in the form of certain 
trace elements and heavy metal supplementation 
is essential during the start-up 
of an AD process, dedicated to stabilizing 
OFMSW. But, adequate care has to 
be taken so that the addition of those elements 
does not exceed inhibitory levels, 
which may cause unrecoverable cessation 
of the anaerobic digester. 


6.7. pH Control 

The stability and consistency of an AD 
system greatly depends on the pH of 
the system. The fermentative and the 
methanogenic group of bacteria are all 
pH-sensitive and operate at different 
pH-ranges. The slightest change in the 
desirable pH results in the cessation of 
the reactor performance. The favorable 
pH range for the growth of 
methanogenic bacteria is 6.8-7.3 (Brummeler 
and Koster 1989). The optimum 
pH for hydrolysis and acidogenesis is 
between 5.5 and 6.5 (Kim et al. 2003; 
Yu and Fang 2002), whereas the growth 
rate of methanogens is greatly reduced 
below pH 6.6 (Mosey and Fernandes 
1989). At an excessively alkaline pH, 
disintegration of microbial granules occurs, 
which subsequently causes process 
failure (Sandberg and Ahring 1992). 
The anaerobic acid-forming bacteria 
have a lower pH range of less than 6.8 

21



for growth (e.g., 5.0-6.0). Undissociated 
volatile acids, which are present below 
pH 6.8, are harmful to methanogens, because 
they can penetrate the bacterial 
cells without any resistance. The pH inside 
the methanogens is higher than the 
pH of the external medium, which results 
in the release of protons from the 
undissociated volatile acids causing inhibition 
in the formation of ATP and 
other processes inside the cytoplasm of 
the methanogens. This in turn inhibits 
methane formation (Anderson and Yang 
1992; Mounfort 1978). Also, atpHabove 
7.3, N[H.sub.3], a toxic form of 
N[H.sub.4]-N, formation occurs resulting 
in suppression of the methanogenic 
activity (El-Fadel et al. 2013). 
It can be garnered from the preceding 
discussion that a multi-staged reactor 
(preferably a three-stage reactor system) 
is more advantageous in terms of stability 
and operational consistency than 
a single-stage reactor. For instance, the 
working pH of the hydrolytic and the 
acidogenic bacteria lies in the range of 
5.5-6.5, whereas the methanogens have 
an optimum pH of 7.8-8.2 (Khanal 
2008). A single-stage reactor system 
thus makes it difficult for the 
methanogens to operate because they 
are not only highly pH sensitive, but the 
organic acids produced inhibit their 
growth and metabolic activity. In the 
case of a single-stage reactor, the drop in 
pH may be countered by the use buffering 
agents (e.g., lime) so that a suitable 
pH in the range of 7.8-8.5 is obtained 
for the operation of the methanogens. 
But, when and if the buffering agents are 
added, the pH adjustments should be so 
estimated and worked out that the conditions 
in the reactor are equally suitable 
for hydrolysis and acidogenesis to occur. 
Alkalinity plays a vital role in controlling 
the pH of an AD system. The total 
alkalinity of an AD system should generally 
lie between 7400 and 27000 mg/ 
L as CaC[O.sub.3] (Cecchi et al. 2003; 
Banks et al. 2008). The alkalinity should 
be properly maintained, because a drop 
in alkalinity indicates a subsequent drop 
in pH level. On the other hand, the bicarbonate 
alkalinity of an AD system 
should be in the range of 2400-5400 mg/ 
L (Anderson and Yang 1992; Ferrer et 
al. 2010). The bicarbonate alkalinity is 
the main carbon source for the autotrophic 
methanogens and represents 
the true buffering capacity of the system. 
In an AD system, the buffering capacity 
is often referred to as alkalinity 
and it is responsible for the equilibrium 
of carbon dioxide and bicarbonate ions. 
It provides resistance to significant and 
rapid changes in pH and therefore is 
proportional to the concentration of bicarbonate. 
The digester imbalance can 
be measured more reliably using buffering 
capacity than by pH measurement, 
which is a direct approach, because accumulation 
of VFAs reduces the buffering 
capacity significantly before the decrease 
in pH (Ward et al. 2008). The increase 
in a low buffering capacity can be 
brought about by reduction in the OLR. 
However, the addition of strong bases or 
carbonate salts, which results in the removal 
of C[O.sub.2] from the gas space 
by converting it into bicarbonate, is a 
more rapid approach to increase the 
buffering capacity (Guwy et al. 1997). 
The latter process of increasing buffering 
capacity is more accurate, because 
the conversion from C[O.sub.2] to bicarbonate 
requires a time lag for gas 
equilibrium to occur, which may result 
in over-dosing. Other approaches include 
modification of the inoculum-tofeed 
ratio, which helps to maintain a 
constant pH (Gunaseelan 1995), and 
co-digestion with another substrate, 
which has a higher alkalinity. 
The VFA to alkalinity ratio ([alpha]) is a 
parameter that indicates the balance between 
the potential pH drop (VFA accumulation) 
and the buffering capacity 
(alkalinity) of the system (Poggi-Varaldo 
and Oleszkiewicz 1992). The alkalinity 
ratio ([alpha]) can be represented by, 
[alpha] = [Acetic acid equivalents] / 
[Calcium carbonate equivalents] 
The desired and optimal value of [alpha] 
is less than 0.3, even though the values 
of [alpha] between 0.3 and 0.4 are acceptable. 
If the value of [alpha] exceeds 
0.4 then the digester is at risk because 
of potential VFA accumulation (Schoen 
et al. 2009). The accumulation of VFA 
can be prevented by suspended feeding, 
until the excess VFA is consumed, or 
by bio-augmentation using pure hydrogenotrophic 
culture or hydrogenotroph-
rich seeds (Angenent et 
al. 2004). 
MSW can be deemed as the most variable 
feedstock, especially given the fact 
that the yield of methane largely depends 
not only on the sorting technique, 
but also on the location of the source of 
feedstock and the time of collection. For 
instance, during the summer season the 
MSW will have a larger portion of garden 
waste in its organic fraction eventually 
leading to lower ultimate methane 
yield. Similarly, locations also influence 
the type of FW produced and the organic 
fraction generated by lifestyle and cultural 
differences (Ward et al. 2008). As 
such, the pH of the substrate or feedstock 
is also greatly influenced by the 
different composition and nature of the 
FW, kitchen waste, market waste, 

22



restaurant waste, etc., based on the season 
and the source where from they are 
being collected. If the substrate has organic 
fractions enriched with VS 
(FVWs) then there is rapid degradation 
in the anaerobic digester. This leads to 
rapid hydrolysis that may lead to acidification 
of the digester and the consequent 
inhibition of methanogenesis. Hence, 
feedstock or substrates, which are rapidly 
hydrolyzed, are capable of inhibiting 
methane formation by acidification of 
the digester. On the contrary, if the substrate 
has organic fractions, which are 
poorly degradable (yard waste, paper 
waste), the hydrolysis phase becomes 
the rate-limiting step. 
In a study conducted by Forster- 
Carneiro et al. (2008a), the feedstock 
characteristics of three different organic 
wastes, FW, OFMSW, and SH-OFMSW, 
were carried out. It was observed 
from the study that the initial mean pH 
of the three substrates was FW-7.0, SHOFMSW-
7.6, OFMSW-7.3; and the initial 
mean alkalinity was FW-200 mg/L 
as CaC[O.sub.3], SH-OFMSW-300 mg/ 
L as CaC[O.sub.3], OFMSW-510 mg/ 
L as CaC[O.sub.3], emphasizing the 
aforementioned perspective of change 
in the pH and alkalinity. On the contrary, 
during thermophilic AD of the previously 
mentioned feedstock the pH values 
remained around 8.1 for the FW reactor; 
7.8 for the SH-OFMSW reactor; 
and 7.9 for the OFMSW reactor. The 
mean alkalinity values were 900 mg/L 
as CaC[O.sub.3] for the FW reactor; 
1400 mg/L as CaC[O.sub.3], for the SHOFMSW 
reactor; and 1650 mg/L as 
CaC[O.sub.3], for the OFMSW reactor. 
It was concluded that the nature of organic 
substrate has an important bearing 
on the overall biodegradation process 
and methane yield. 
VFA is a key intermediate in the process 
of AD, which is capable of inhibiting 
methanogenesis at high concentrations. 
It is a crucial parameter that influences 
the pH of an AD system. It is evident 
that the higher the VFA concentration 
in a system the lower the pH and the 
greater the environment is favoring the 
growth of acid-forming bacteria. In other 
words, the environment becomes increasingly 
unfavorable for the 
methanogens to survive. Normally the 
VFA inhibiting range is 1000-3000 mg/ 
L as C[H.sub.3]COOH (Angelidaki et 
al. 2005). The wide range is due to various 
microbial structures having different 
buffering capacities because of their 
varying toleration and acclimation capacities. 
For instance, the methanosarcinaceae 
is found to be more tolerant to 
VFA than the methanosaetaceae 
(Karakashev et al. 2005). In a study carried 
out by Siegert and Banks (2005) it 
was observed that fermentation of glucose 
was inhibited at total VFA concentrations 
above 4000 mg/L as 
C[H.sub.3]COOH. Although acetic acid 
is usually present in higher concentrations 
during AD than other fatty acids, 
the activities of the methanogens are 
more inhibited by propionic and butyric 
acids (Wang et al. 1999). Even though 
Boone and Xun (1987) reported that 
propionic acid concentrations above 
3000 mg/L caused digester failure Pullammanappallil 
et al. (2001) concluded 
that the propionic acid was the effect of 
inhibition in an AD system rather than 
the cause. An increase in VFA concentration 
can be due to overload of OLR, 
hence monitoring of VFAs, particularly 
butyrate and isobutyrate, has been 
demonstrated to indicate process stability 
(Ahring et al. 1995). This may be attributed 
to the fact that the methanogens 
present in an AD system are not able 
to metabolize the acetate produced unless 
their numbers are sufficiently high. 
As mentioned before, in the case of organic 
feedstock, which has high VS, the 
degree of hydrolysis is rapid and may 
especially contribute to this problem of 
VFA accumulation. Because methanogenesis 
inhibitors, such as excessive fatty 
acids, [H.sub.2]S, and N[H.sub.3], 
are mainly toxic in their unionized 
forms, it is imperative to control their 
concentrations so that there is a balance 
in the overall pH. This is because the 
relative proportion of the ionized and 
unionized forms is pH-dependent. For 
instance, ammonia is toxic above pH 7 
whereas, VFA and hydrogen sulfide are 
toxic below pH 7. 
As mentioned before, the composition 
of OFMSW varies widely, ranging from 
FW (vegetable waste or fruit peels) to 
yard waste (leaves or grasses). The strategy 
of the waste collection greatly affects 
the characteristics of OFMSW, 
hence the yield of biogas and disposal 
(agricultural fields, landfill, or incineration) 
of the solid-sludge or digestate, 
following the AD process. The SBP and 
SMP was observed to be 200 
[m.sup.3]/ton of waste treated and 0.4 
[m.sup.3]/kg of VS (fed to the reactor), 
respectively, in case of SS-OFMSW. 
However, for a mixture of the grey fraction 
of MSW, MS-OFMSW, and sludge, 
the SBP and SMP were recorded as 60 
[m.sup.3]/ton of waste treated and 0.13 
[m.sup.3]/kg of VS, respectively (Bolzonella 
et al. 2006). Thus it was inferred 
that higher biogas yields were generally 
obtained with SS-OFMSW than from 
MS-OFMSW. Also, the digestate of 
MS-OFMSW was difficult to handle 
and had to be disposed of in landfills, 
or incinerated. However, the heterogeneous 
nature of OFMSW in SS-AD system 
may create a multiplicity of ideal 

23



micro-environments for the growth of 
each of the microbial families required 
to complete the AD process. This in turn 
may result in the fermentative processes 
of hydrolysis and acidogenesis proceeding 
differently than in conventional submerged 
culture (Shankaranand et al. 
1992). 
Fermentative microorganisms, especially 
hydrolytic acidogens, require large 
surface areas to colonize and hydrolyze 
feedstock, which are insoluble. They operate 
actively at relatively low pH 
(5.5-6.0) (Chyi and Dague 1994). On 
the other hand, syntrophic acetogens 
and methanogens require stable neutral 
pH for functioning and are very sensitive 
to even low concentrations of inhibitors 
(e.g., N[H.sub.3], [H.sub.2]S, 
and short chain fatty acid). Not only 
that, syntrophic acetogens also need 
close proximity with methanogens for 
efficient interspecies hydrogen transfer. 
In the case of feedstock, which are rich 
in lignocellulose, the enhancement in 
hydrolysis is brought about by high temperatures, 
at which the loosening of the 
structure of the lignocellulose starts, 
thereby making them more accessible 
to colonization by cellulolytic and xylanolytic 
microbes, and their glycosyl 
hydrolases, eventually accelerating the 
enzymatic hydrolytic reaction (Lv et al. 
2010). However, high-temperature 
based thermophilic anaerobic reactors 
suffer from poor stability, because of accumulation 
of short chain fatty acids, 
especially propionate; reduced methane 
production; and increased carbon dioxide 
content (Speece et al. 2006; Iranpour 
2006). During the early stages of the 
thermophilic AD process, it is possible 
to reduce methanogenic inhibition due 
to excessive VFA accumulation and the 
subsequent drop in pH by co-digesting 
carbohydrate-rich feedstock with other 
feedstock, or by using a two-phase digestion 
system, such as TPAD (Li et al. 
2011). Another way of preventing the 
methanogenic inhibition is by leachate 
recycling, which enables the colonization 
of the bacteria throughout the digester 
by providing a passive transport 
mechanism for microbial communities. 
This also considerably reduces the need 
for the large amount of digestate material 
required to inoculate the fresh feedstock 
before loading the digester. Even 
though this serves to be beneficial, in the 
case of AD system employing SS-OFMSW, 
the requirement of the solid-sludge 
or digestate to inoculate the fresh feedstock 
is also one of the major limitations 
of SS-AD (Li et al. 2011).


6.8. C/N ratio 

The C/N ratio is an important parameter 
indicative of the nature of the waste and 
its potential biodegradability. The stability 
of an anaerobic digester can be ascertained 
by selecting the C/N ratio as the 
variable parameter. This can be attributed 
to the fact that the C/N ratio determines 
both the N[H.sub.3]-N and VFA 
concentrations observed in the anaerobic 
digester. With the increase in 
N[H.sub.3]-N, the pH is raised, whereas 
the VFAs, which neutralize the 
HC[O.sub.3.sup.-], C[O.sub.3.sup.2.-], 
and acetate ions, govern the decrease in 
pH (Shanmugam and Horan 2009). It 
was reported by Callaghan et al. (2000) 
and Salminen and Rintala (2002) that in 
case of AD systems acclimatized to treat 
high protein wastes the tolerance level 
of N[H.sub.3] were 11600 and 6000 
mg/L, respectively. Normally, FWs have 
an optimum C/N ratio in the range of 
30:1-40:1 (total carbon) and 25:1-30:1 
(biodegradable carbon) (Kayhanian and 
Tchobanoglous 1993). However, in 
some instances the C/N ratio of FW may 
be below 20. In such cases, rich carbon 
sources (such as glucose) (Hills 1979), 
cellulosic waste (such as grass, cereals, 
straws, and other crop residues) (Fraser 
1977), or mixed paper (C/N ratio of 
100:1-173:1) (Yen and Brune 2007) 
may be added to achieve optimum conditions 
for the AD process. However, 
the addition of paper has to be made 
very carefully taking into consideration 
the manufacturing procedure of the paper 
to be added, because there are certain 
types of papers that are treated with 
additives for improving the bleaching 
process and the addition of these types 
of papers may lead to the release of certain 
chlorinated compounds, which are 
one of the principal inhibitors of microbial 
activity. The optimum COD/N 
range for efficient microbial activity, involving 
AD of OFMSW, is from 20:1 
to 36.36:1, with 25:1 being considered 
as the optimum (Hills 1979; Kivaisi and 
Mtila 1998; Rao and Singh 2004; Bouallagui 
et al. 2005; Yen and Brune 2007; 
Guermoud et al. 2009; Khalid et al. 
2011; El-Fadel et al. 2013). One of the 
problems associated with high C/N ratio 
is that the availability of nutrients will 
be lower, because nitrogen is regarded 
as a crucial nutrient for the 
methanogens. On the other hand, a low 
C/N ratio would result in increased ammonia 
production, thereby causing ammonia 
inhibition. 
In an anaerobic digester, ammonia can 
be found in two forms, namely, unionized 
ammonia (N[H.sub.3]) or free ammonia 
and ionized ammonia or ammonium 
ion (N[H.sub.4.sup.+]). Between 
these two, the N[H.sub.4.sup.+] ion may 
inhibit the methane production directly. 
In general, it was established that TAN 
concentrations of around 1700-1800 
mg/L caused anaerobic digester failure 
(Albertson 1961; Melbinger and Don- 

24



nellon 1971). This was emphasized by 
a batch study conducted in a high-solids 
AD process, where ammonium-nitrogen 
concentration was a more significant 
factor than free ammonia in affecting 
the methanogenic activity (Lay et al. 
1998). The methanogenic activity was 
observed to decrease with an increase 
in N[H.sub.4.sup.+]-N over a wide pH 
of 6.5-8.5. The methane production 
dropped by up to 10%, at an ammonium-
nitrogen concentration of 
1670-3710 mg/L; 50% at 4090-5550 
mg/L; and to zero at 5880-6000 mg/L. 
In addition, it was observed that the lagphase 
time in the batch experiment was 
dependent on the ammonia level, but not 
on the ammonium. It was further noticed 
that, when the free ammonia-nitrogen 
concentration was higher than 500 
mg/L, a considerable shock appeared, 
suggesting the free ammonia level to be 
a more sensitive factor than the ammonium 
level in a non-acclimatized bacterial 
system. 
The performance of an AD reactor is associated 
with the structure of the microbial 
community present within the reactor 
(Yenigun and Demirel 2013). It was 
reported in a study by Hobson and Shaw 
(1976) that the growth of Methanobacterium 
formicicum was partly inhibited 
at a TAN concentration of 3000 mg/L, 
and at a pH of 7.1, and it was completely 
inhibited at 4000 mg TAN/L. A more recent 
study by Schnurrer and Nordberg 
(2008) reported a gradual increase in 
ammonia concentration beyond 3000 
mg TAN/L, resulting in a shift from the 
acetoclastic methanogenesis to syntrophic 
acetate oxidation during labscale 
AD of SS-OFMSW, at an HRT 
of 30 days. During hydrolysis, the first 
stage of the AD process, the frmentative 
group of hydrolyzing bacteria deaminate 
nitrogenous compounds, proteins 
mainly, present in the organic fraction 
to produce ammonia. As such, a large 
amount of ammonia is produced during 
the hydrolysis stage, in accordance with 
the stoichiometric relationship (Kayhanian 
1999). It has also been established 
that the effect of ammonia production 
is greater on the activity of the 
methanogens, rather than the acetogens 
or acidogens. Even though nitrogen is 
an essential nutrient for microbes performing 
AD of organic wastes, and it is 
available from ammonia (McCarty and 
Mckinney 1961a; McCarty and Mckinney 
1961b), the excess of ammonia may 
inhibit the methanogenic activity. The 
inhibition is primarily due to TAN, 
which is a combination of free ammonia 
nitrogen (N[H.sub.3]) and ionized ammonium 
nitrogen (N[H.sub.4.sup.+]). 
The TAN affects the methanogenic activity 
in the following three ways: 
1. The N[H.sub.4.sup.+] ions directly 
inhibit the methane synthesizing enzyme. 
2. The N[H.sub.3] molecules passively 
diffuse into the cells of the 
methanogens, owing to their hydrophobic 
nature, causing proton imbalance 
and potassium deficiency (Sprott and 
Patel 1986). This is because the difference 
in intracellular pH causes the 
N[H.sub.3] molecules to convert into 
N[H.sub.4.sup.+] ions by absorbing protons 
from the cell itself. In turn, this triggers 
balancing of protons in the cell by 
expending energy using potassium antiporter 
(Sprott et al. 1984). 
3. The growth rates of hydrogen-utilizing 
methanogens are severely affected 
by high concentration of TAN (Wiegant 
and Zeeman 1986). An increase in TAN 
concentration results in the fast production 
of acetate. 
In the absence of [H.sub.2]-consuming 
methanogens, intermediate compounds, 
propionate and (or) [H.sub.2], accumulate, 
which affects the production of 
C[H.sub.4] from the acetate. As the 
methanogenic activity is inhibited by 
TAN concentration, the fatty acids produced 
by the acidogens continue to accumulate 
resulting in a drop in pH, 
thereby eventually leading to digester 
failure. The effect of ammonia molecules 
into the cellular structure of 
methanogens was supported by many 
studies. In a separate experiment by 
Sprott et al. (1985), the transport of 
[K.sup.+] ions in M. hungatei pretreated 
with ammonia was studied and no 
methanogenic activity was observed. 
However, the addition of [Ca.sup.2+] or 
[Mg.sup.2+] once again activated the 
methanogenic cells, enabling them to 
make ATP and transport [K.sup.+] ions. 
It was proposed by McCarty and McKinney 
(1961a, 1961b) that the equilibrium 
concentrations of free ammonia and 
ammonium ions are dependent on pH 
and temperature of the solution. Moreover, 
it was also inferred that the inhibition 
was mainly due to free ammonia in 
solution rather ammonium ions. However, 
in a study showing the relationship 
between OLR and ammonia inhibition 
by Melbinger and Donnellon (1971) 
it was concluded that the methanogenic 
bacteria could be acclimated to ammonium 
ions if the feed was gradually increased. 
As such, in those digesters, 
TAN concentrations of up to 2700 mg/L 
may exist without any failure. In a separate 
study by Gallert and Winter (1997) 
it was observed that methane production 
was inhibited by 50% at 220-280 mg 
N[H.sub.3]-N/L and 680-690 mg 
N[H.sub.3]-N/L, during AD of glucose, 

25



under mesophilic and thermophilic conditions, 
respectively. It was concluded 
from the study that the thermophilic flora 
was able to tolerate ammonia toxicity 
twice as great as the mesophilic flora. In 
a later study, it was pointed out that the 
temperature increase in the thermophilic 
range of 40-64 [degrees]C had a negative 
effect on the AD of cattle manure 
from 700 mg N[H.sub.3]/L onwards, inhibiting 
methane production (Angelidaki 
and Ahring 1994). Sung and Liu 
(2003) observed that ammonium nitrogen 
(N[H.sub.4.sup.+]-N) concentration 
in the range of 8000-13 000 mg/L, inhibited 
100% methane production, under 
thermophilic conditions. Thus, it 
was asserted that the AD of OFMSW at 
a certain pH and temperature was influenced 
by ammonia, especially free ammonia, 
because the amount of 
N[H.sub.3] is a function of TAN, as per 
the following equation proposed by Anthonisen 
et al. (1976): 
N[H.sub.3]-N= [N[H.sub.4.sup.+] -N x 
[10.sup.pH]] / [[e.sup.6344/ 
273+T]+[10.sup.pH]] 
It can be inferred from this equation that 
with an increase in temperature and pH, 
a higher amount of free ammonia is released. 
Hence, under thermophilic AD it 
is best to operate at the lowest possible 
pH, and under mesophilic AD the increase 
in pH may be afforded. In a study 
carried out by El-Hadj et al. (2009) it 
was concluded that during high solids 
AD of OFMSW ammonia and ammonium 
could be released at high concentrations. 
It was also seen that there was 
50% inhibition in methane production at 
215 and 468 mg/L of N[H.sub.3]-N, under 
mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. 
Moreover, it was further observed 
that the presence of N[H.sub.4.sup.+]- 
N ions at 3860 and 5600 mg/L, under 
mesophilic and thermophilic conditions, 
respectively, inhibited methane production 
by 50%. Under mesophilic conditions 
the pH increase was found to negatively 
affect the biogas generation. Cuetos 
et al. (2008) also observed that during 
mesophilic (34 [degrees]C) anaerobic 
co-digestion of slaughterhouse 
waste and OFMSW, in a CSTR, at an 
OLR of 3.7 kg VS/[m.sup.3] per day, the 
inhibition of methane production started 
to occur at a TAN concentration of 
4100 mg/L and a FAN concentration of 
337 mg/L, under a pH of 7.5. Similar 
results were also observed earlier, when 
OFMSW was digested in a CSTR at 
mesophilic and thermophilic temperatures, 
with ammonia un-adapted inoculum 
(Gallert and Winter 1997; Gallert 
et al. 1998). It was noted that, at a pH 
of 7.5, 220 mg/L of FAN caused 50% 
inhibition in methane production, under 
mesophilic conditions, whereas under 
thermophilic conditions, 690 mg/L of 
FAN caused 50% inhibition in methane 
production. 
However, the decrease in methane production 
caused by ammonia inhibition 
due to high TAN concentration can be 
removed by lowering the pH and a subsequent 
decrease of free ammonia concentration. 
It was reported by Kayhanian 
(1999) that the inhibition at TAN 
concentrations of 1200 mg/L during pilot-
scale thermophilic AD of OFMSW 
was mitigated by dilution of the digester 
content with water, or by adjusting the 
feedstock C/N ratio, in between 30 and 
40. In another study by Shanmugam and 
Horan (2009) an adjustment of the C/N 
ratio at 15 and the pH at 6.5, maintained 
the TAN and FAN concentrations under 
control, thereby giving the best results 
in terms of biogas production. 


6.9. Retention times 

Retention times play a crucial role in 
dictating the consistency and the efficiency 
of an anaerobic digester system, 
treating OFMSW. There are two concepts 
of retention times in an AD system. 
These are SRT and HRT. The SRT 
is the average time that the biomass 
(solids) remains in the digester. The 
HRT is the average time that the waste 
is retained in the digester. Studies have 
shown that the biogas yield of a digester, 
treating highly biodegradable organic 
fraction, such as FW, with longer SRT 
than HRT, is significantly greater than 
the biogas yield of a digester, having 
SRT almost equal to the HRT. This can 
be attributed to the fact that a longer 
SRT, in the case of digesters treating 
FW, results in the regeneration of alkalinity 
and flushing of excess VFA (Climenhaga 
and Banks 2008b). Another 
reason, which asserts for longer SRT 
than HRT, is that the generation time, 
which is the time required for a population 
of bacteria to double in size, of 
methanogens is relatively long (Gerardi 
2003). Systems with high SRT are characterized 
by biofilm or granule formation 
inside the reactor, or biomass settling 
outside the reactor (Angenent et 
al. 2004). Such systems with high SRT 
maximize removal capacity, reduce reactor 
volume, and provide buffering capacity 
for protection against the effects 
of shock loadings and toxic compounds 
present in the OFMSW. Longer SRTs 
can be achieved by biomass immobilization 
and retention technique, multistage 
(two- or three-stage) AD systems, 
long stagnant periods, followed by liquid 
wastage for CSTR systems, and by 
collection of the effluent from the top, 
with minor removal of solids from the 
bottom. 


6.10. Sorting techniques 

26



Even though the major fraction of the 
generated MSW comprises organic matter, 
there are other recyclable fractions, 
such as plastics, mixed paper, cardboard, 
iron and aluminum scrap, glass 
and inert, textiles, etc., which necessitate 
the application of various separation 
techniques. This is because the recyclable 
fractions, other than the organic 
matter, are not only valuable for sustaining 
the recycling industries, but their 
proper separation from the commingled 
MSW ensures better biodegradability of 
the OFMSW and also helps to economize 
the overall separation process. In 
Europe, with the introduction of S and 
MS techniques, the AD of OFMSW has 
received a considerable boost in the last 
two decades (Dong et al. 2010). The SS 
technique, as the name suggests, can be 
defined as a mechanism of procuring the 
biodegradable fraction of the MSW directly 
from the source, whereas the mechanical 
sorting technique relies on the 
assistance of certain machines to procure 
the organic feedstock from the 
MSW. 
The biodegradability of OFMSW is one 
of the crucial components in controlling 
the AD rate and the application of SS 
(Angelidaki et al. 2006; Davidsson et 
al. 2007; Forster-Carneiro et al. 2007, 
2008a; Hartmann and Ahring 2005; 
Ghanimeh et al. 2012; Pognani et al. 
2012) and MS (Bolzonella et al. 2003, 
2006; Forster-Carneiro et al. 2008b; 
Fantozzi and Buratti 2011) techniques, 
while procuring OFMSW have massively 
contributed to the cause of high 
biodegradability. In a study by Davidsson 
et al. (2007) the contribution of 
source-sorting in the procurement of 
highly BOFMSW was emphasized. It 
was observed from the study that the 
thermophilic pilot scale digestion of 17 
types of domestically SS-OFMSW originating 
from seven full-scale sorting 
systems had given a VS-degradation 
rate of around 80%, with a methane 
yield of 300-400 N[m.sup.3] 
C[H.sub.4]/ton [VS.sub.in] achieved, 
for a retention time of 15 days. Similarly, 
Forster-Carneiro et al. (2008b) analyzed 
the performances of two lab-scale 
(5.0 L) reactors anaerobically treating 
SS-OFMSW (obtained from a university 
restaurant) and MS-OFMSW (obtained 
from a municipal treatment plant 
located in Cadiz, Spain). It was observed 
that, under thermophilic conditions 
(55 [degrees]C) and at TS content 
of 20%, the SS-OFMSW exhibited the 
classical waste decomposition pattern 
with a fast start-up phase beginning 
within 0-5 days, an acclimation stage 
between days 5 and 30, and a subsequent 
stabilization phase. In case of the 
MS-OFMSW, a methanogenic pattern 
throughout the whole experimental period 
was observed. The VS removal in the 
case of the SS-OFMSW was 45% with 
a cumulative gas production of 120.0 L, 
whereas in the case of the MS-OFMSW, 
a higher VS removal rate of 56% was 
observed, with cumulative biogas production 
of 82.0 L. 
Apart from the SS and MS techniques, 
there is also another sorting technique 
that can be applied while procuring organic 
fractions of MSW and that is the 
water-sorting (WS) technique (Dong et 
al. 2010). The WS technique can be defined 
as a sorting technique that relies 
on the buoyant and sink forces of water 
for the separation of the biodegradable 
fractions of the MSW. The commingled 
MSW comprises biodegradable fractions, 
metals, heavy metals, plastics, and 
combustible fractions. The WS-OFMSW 
is the biodegradable fraction, which 
is a mixture of kitchen waste, FVW, garden 
waste, waste paper, etc. In a study 
conducted by Dong et al. (2010), it was 
observed that the biodegradability of the 
WS-OFMSW, with VS/TS of 61.6%, 
was superior to the MS-OFMSW but 
poorer than the SS-OFMSW. This can 
be attributed to the fact that a major 
fraction of the WS-OFMSW comprises 
carbohydrates followed by proteins and 
lipids, even though the C/N ratio of the 
WS-OFMSW feedstock is similar to 
MS-OFMSW. The superiority of the SSOFMSW 
is attributed to its high average 
organic content of 77.7% (in terms of 
VS) in comparison to MS-OFMSW, 
which has an average organic content 
of 43.0% (in terms of VS). SS-OFMSW 
mostly comprises FVW, whereas MSOFMSW 
comprises not only organic 
matter but a large amount of inorganic 
material, mainly from soil or sand and 
small inorganic material (Forster- 
Carneiro et al. 2008b). This was further 
asserted in a study by Bolzonella et al. 
(2006) where it was shown that AD of 
SS-OFMSW gave a SBP of up to 200 
[m.sup.3]/ton of treated waste, with a 
SMP of some 0.4 [m.sup.3] 
C[H.sub.4]/kg [VS.sub.feed]. On the 
contrary, the AD of a combination of 
MS-OFMSW (35%), grey fraction of 
MSW (50%), and sewage sludge (15%) 
gave a SBP of up to 60 [m.sup.3]/ton of 
waste treated, with a SMP of some 0.13 
[m.sup.3] C[H.sub.4]/kg [VS.sub.feed]. 
However, the VS removal was superior 
in the latter case (40%-45%) compared 
to the AD of SS-OFMSW, where the VS 
removal was 35%-40%. 


7. Process design aspect of AD of OFMSW 

The rapid development in the various 
facets of AD, involving stabilization of 
OFMSW, saw many scientists and researchers 
come up with several kinetic 
expressions. Those kinetic formulations 

27



were obtained upon conducting various 
pilot-scale and lab-scale studies. 
Mata-Alvarez et al. (1990, 1992) upon 
conducting two experimental studies established 
that a first-order kinetic model 
was relevant in determining the methane 
yield pertaining to AD of OFMSW. In 
1990, the first experimental study dealing 
with the performance evaluation of 
anaerobic digesters treating differently 
sorted OFMSW showed a kinetic constant 
(k) of 2.95 [day.sup.-1], for SSOFMSW. 
On the other hand, a kinetic 
constant (k) of 0.410 [day.sup.-1] was 
observed for MS-OFMSW. The second 
experiment in 1992 resulted in a k-value 
of 3.1 [day.sup.-1], for SS-OFMSW. A 
bench-scale study was performed on AD 
of OFMSW under co-digestion with primary 
sewage sludge and consequently, 
a two-stage mathematical model of acidogenesis 
and methanogenesis was developed 
and validated. It was observed 
that anaerobic co-digestion of OFMSW 
with dewatered sewage sludge, primary 
sewage sludge and several other pure 
organic co-substrates, such as vegetable 
oil, animal fat, cellulose and protein, 
had a significant impact on the rate of 
methane production (Kiely et al. 1997). 
The said model was coded to simulate 
observed pH, N[H.sub.3], and 
C[H.sub.4] production also from the experimental 
work. 
In a separate study, Mora-Naranjo et al. 
(2004) characterized a structured model 
based on the considerations of coupled 
reaction processes and interactions between 
relevant microorganism populations. 
Liu et al. (2008) predicted the 
methane yield at an optimum pH, and 
later on developed a mathematical model 
that simulated the optimal pH of an 
anaerobic batch digestion process, treating 
OFMSW, under varying temperatures. 
The model was developed on the 
basis of the microbial growth kinetics 
and was divided into three types of kinetics, 
pertaining to hydrolysis, acidification, 
and methanogenesis, respectively. 
Monod-type kinetics was used to develop 
the growth of anaerobic microbes, 
whereas the consumption of substrates 
and acids as well as the biomass decay 
were described by first-order reactions. 
In another instance, the maximum specific 
growth rate, [[micro].sub.max], of 
the anaerobic mixed culture was estimated 
with the help of an autocatalytic 
kinetic model developed by Fernandez 
et al. (2010). They conducted AD of 
OFMSW at mesophilic temperatures, 
under different initial substrate concentrations. 
A kinetic model was developed 
from this study, which established that 
the reactor with low TS concentration 
showed a greater [[micro].sub.max] for 
the microbes responsible for the 
biodegradation process, and also the 
yield coefficient for methane generation 
was higher. In fact, the experimental results, 
demonstrated by Rao and Singh 
(2004) were very much akin to that 
shown by Fernandez et al. (2010) in 
terms of a high TS concentration. In the 
latter experiment, anaerobic batch digestion 
of municipal garbage at different 
temperatures and OLRs was conducted, 
and the process kinetics was developed 
using a first-order model, based on the 
limiting substrate condition. 
Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2011d) conducted 
an experimental study on dry-thermophilic 
AD and used the substrate consumption 
model as proposed by Romero 
Garcia (1991) for determining respective 
kinetic parameters. Out of various 
key operational parameters, SRT was 
varied in the range of 8-40 days, to determine 
its effect on methane yield. 
Consequently, the process kinetics was 
studied and the maximum specific 
growth rate of the micro-organisms was 
obtained as 0.580 [day.sup.-1]. The 
degradation of the VS by AD was observed 
to follow a first-order reaction 
kinetics. In another instance, Bollon et 
al. (2011) developed a kinetic model resembling 
dry AD of OFMSW and assessed 
the degradation of acetate. The 
acetate uptake rate and the half-saturation 
constant were found to be satisfactorily 
high at a moisture content of 65%, 
compared to that of 82%. In fact, the 
methane production was evidently high 
at high solid and low moisture content 
in congruence with the validated model. 
Particle size and organic content of 
OFMSW also had a pivotal impact in 
the overall kinetics of dry AD of OFMSW, 
at 30% TS concentration and under 
thermophilic conditions, as reported by 
Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2012a). A modified 
mathematical expression based on the 
widely validated product-generation kinetic 
model (Romero Garcia 1991) was 
proposed while conducting the aforesaid 
experiment, in a semi-continuous stirred 
tank reactor. The different kinetic models, 
as proposed by various researchers, 
available for AD of OFMSW are shown 
in Fig. 5. 
Increased dependencies on fossil-derived 
fuels and energy insecurity, due to 
political instability in major oil exporting 
countries, have led to growing global 
environmental concerns. The burning 
of fossil-fuel leads to a harmful effect 
on the atmosphere and global climate 
by the emission of pollutants, such as 
[CO.sub.x], [NO.sub.x], [SO.sub.x], 
[C.sub.x][H.sub.x], soot, ash, droplets 
of tars, and other organic compounds. 
Under these circumstances, there has 
been a renewed interest in biological hydrogen 
production, because it produces 
water when combusted as a fuel or con- 

28



verted to electricity. Hydrogen, as a sustainable 
and clean energy source, is a 
promising alternative to fossil fuel with 
minimal or zero use of hydrocarbons. 
It makes up about three-quarters of all 
organic matter. Different substrates, including 
OFMSW, have been reported to 
favor hydrogen production (Okamoto et 
al. 2000). The evolution of photosynthetic 
hydrogen from MSW was worked 
out by Fascetti and Todini (1995). It was 
observed from the batch and continuous 
experiments that the acidic aqueous 
stream obtained from such refuse was 
a good substrate for the growth of 
Khodobacter spaeroides RV. It was also 
observed that substrate from the acidogenesis 
of FVW gave higher hydrogen 
evolution rate, as compared to synthetic 
medium (100 versus 35 mL [H.sub.2]/g 
dry weight h). According to Hallenbeck 
and Benemann (2002) there are predominantly 
three microbial groups that are 
responsible for producing hydrogen. 
These are cyanobacteria, which are autotrophs 
and directly decompose water 
into hydrogen and oxygen in the presence 
of light energy by photosynthesis, 
and heterotrophs, which use organic 
substrates for hydrogen production. The 
heterotrophic microbes are responsible 
for producing hydrogen, under anaerobic 
conditions, either in the presence or 
in the absence of light energy. Accordingly, 
the anaerobic process of hydrogen 
production may be of two types: (i) photo-
fermentation, and (ii) dark-fermentation. 
Photo-fermentation can be defined 
as the production of hydrogen carried 
out in presence of light by photo-synthetic 
purple non-sulfur bacteria, whereas 
dark-fermentation is the production 
of hydrogen carried out in the absence 
of light by fermentative bacteria, primarily 
Clostridia. 
Chen et al. (2006) studied the growth 
kinetics of hydrogen in dark fermentation 
using various substrates including 
OFMSW, through a series of batch experiments. 
The modified Gompertz 
equation was applied to determine the 
hydrogen production potential (H), hydrogen 
production rate (R), and lag 
phase (A). As such, the hydrogen production 
was well correlated to the modified 
Gompertz equation ([R.sup.2] > 
0.98). The hydrogen yield and the specific 
hydrogen production rates were 
calculated from H and added substrate, 
as well as from R and biomass concentration, 
respectively. The bio-hydrogen 
production efficiency was found to be 
highly related to the optimal control of 
substrate to biomass (S/X) ratio. It was 
observed that at a substrate (FW as 
OFMSW) concentration of 4600 mg 
COD/L, the hydrogen yield was maximized 
with 101 mL/g COD. The corresponding 
hydrogen production potential 
(H), hydrogen production rate (R), lag 
phase ([lambda]), and specific hydrogen 
production rate were 69 mL, 12.1 mL/ 
h, 4 h, and 139 mL/g VSS h, respectively, 
with [R.sup.2] being 0.9991. Similarly, 
the maximum specific hydrogen 
production rate was reached (286 mL/ 
g VSS h) at a substrate concentration 
of 32300 mg COD/L with H, R, [lambda], 
and hydrogen yield being 178 mL, 
25.0 mL/h, 3 h, and 37 mL/g COD, respectively, 
with [R.sup.2] being 0.9981. 
The growth kinetics of hydrogen-producing 
bacteria for OFMSW (FW) was 
also studied using the Michaelis-Menten 
equation, where the dependence of hydrogen 
production rate (R) on substrate 
concentration was shown. The half-saturation 
constant ([K.sub.S]) and the 
[R.sub.max] obtained were 8700 mg 
COD/L and 29.9 mL/h, respectively. 
However, the specific growth rate ([micro]), 
being 0.568 [h.sup.-1], was observed 
to be maximized in the case of 
glucose as test substrate, at a temperature 
of 37 [degrees]C with Enterobacter 
cloacae (Kumar et al. 2000). 
The production of fermentative hydrogen 
from organic substrates proceeds simultaneously 
with the growth of hydrogen 
producing bacteria (HPB) and certain 
soluble metabolites. Various kinetic 
models, such as the modified Gompertz 
model, have been proposed to describe 
the substrate degradation, HPB growth, 
hydrogen production, and some soluble 
metabolite formation in a batch fermentative 
hydrogen production process. 
These models allow the prediction of 
substrate degradation, HPB growth, hydrogen 
production, and some soluble 
metabolite formation at a given time in 
a batch fermentative hydrogen production 
process. As such, Zwietering et al. 
(1990) developed the modified Gompertz 
model, which has been widely 
used to describe the progress of substrate 
degradation, HPB growth, hydrogen 
production, and some soluble 
metabolite production in a batch fermentative 
hydrogen production process. 
It was observed that the cumulative substrate 
degradation (H) increased very 
slowly with increasing cultivation time 
from 0 to [lambda] (lag time) and then 
rapidly increased at the rate of 
[R.sub.max] (maximum rate), finally 
reaching an asymptotic value 
[H.sub.max] (maximum cumulative value) 
with further increase in the cultivation 
time. In a separate study by Wang 
and Wan (2008b) the progress of hydrogen 
production in batch tests using 
glucose as substrate was determined using 
the modified logistic model, which 
is very similar to the modified Gompertz 
model. A similar model was used by 
Nathoa et al. (2014) to describe the cumulative 
hydrogen production, the max- 

29



imum production rate, and the lag phase 
duration during two-phase anaerobic 
fermentation of banana peels. This modified 
logistic model was previously used 
by Mu et al. (2006, 2007) to describe 
the progress of HPB growth in batch 
tests. Furthermore, it was also inferred 
by the same team (Mu et al. 2007) that 
the modified Gompertz model was the 
most suitable model, after comparing 
the ability of the modified Gompertz 
model, modified logistic model, and 
modified Richards model to describe the 
progress of HPB growth in batch tests. It 
was inferred from these studies that the 
modified Gompertz model was a near 
omnipotent model, in terms of describing 
the progress of substrate degradation, 
HPB growth, hydrogen production, 
and some soluble metabolite production 
in a batch fermentative hydrogen production 
process. It was also concluded 
that the modified logistic model, which 
has a similar property as the modified 
Gompertz model, can also be used to describe 
the progress of a batch fermentative 
hydrogen production process (Wang 
and Wan 2009b). 
For the production of fermentative hydrogen 
any substrate source containing 
carbohydrate is considered very important, 
because carbohydrates provide carbon 
and energy sources for HPB. In a 
study by Lay et al. (2003) it was concluded 
that HPB were more effective in 
producing hydrogen from carbohydraterich 
substrates. Various kinetic models 
have been proposed to describe the effects 
of substrate concentrations on the 
substrate degradation rate, HPB growth, 
and hydrogen production. The classical 
Monod model (or the Michaelis-Menten 
model) is one of them, which shows that 
the rate (R) increases with the increase 
in substrate concentration, finally reaching 
an asymptotic value [R.sub.max]. In 
addition, it also suggests that at lower 
substrate concentration (relative to the 
half-saturation constant, [K.sub.s]), R is 
approximately proportional to the substrate 
concentration (first order in substrate 
concentration), while at higher 
substrate concentration, R is independent 
of the substrate concentration (zero 
order in substrate concentration). However, 
in the case of inhibition of the fermentative 
hydrogen produced from the 
substrate at much higher concentrations, 
the classical Monod model becomes unsatisfactory 
and the modified Monod 
model, such as the Andrew model, becomes 
appropriate to describe the effects 
of substrate concentrations on the 
hydrogen production rate and specific 
HPB growth rate (Wang and Wan 
2009a). 
Kumar et al. (2000) used a modified Andrew 
model to describe the effects of 
substrate concentrations on specific E. 
cloacae IIT-BT 08 growth rate, in batch 
tests. Aguilar et al. (2013) applied a 
model based on acidogenic substrate as 
carbon, to study the effect of HRT on 
hydrogen production and organic matter 
solubilization in acidogenic AD of 
OFMSW. Acidogenic substrate as carbon 
can be defined as the fraction of 
solubilized organic matter that has not 
been transformed into VFA and, therefore, 
may be used to study the behavior 
of the hydrolytic and acidogenesis phases 
(Fdez.-Guelfo et al. 2012b). It was inferred 
that high acidogenic substrate as 
carbon concentration results in the transformation 
of high VFA from the higher 
amounts of solubilized organic matter 
during the acidogenesis step, eventually 
leading to higher [H.sub.2] production. 
The model was developed using classical 
parameters, such as organic carbon 
concentration measured by total organic 
carbon analyzer, each individual VFA 
concentration measured by gas chromatography, 
number of carbons of each 
VFA and the molecular weight of each 
VFA. 
In addition to the models discussed earlier, 
there are other kinetic models that 
describe the effect of inhibitor concentrations 
on hydrogen production, the effect 
of temperatures on hydrogen production, 
the effects of pH on fermentative 
hydrogen production, the effect of 
dilution rates on hydrogen production, 
and the relationship among the substrate 
degradation rate, HPB growth, and 
product formation. For instance, the 
modified Han-Levenspiel model has 
been widely used to describe the effect 
of inhibitor concentrations on hydrogen 
production (Wang et al. 2008; Liu et al. 
2006; van Niel et al. 2003). Similarly, 
the Arrhenius model and the Ratkowsky 
model best describe the effect of temperatures 
on hydrogen production 
(Wang andWan 2008a, 2009b). The Andrew 
model (Wang and Wan 2009a; 
Fabiano and Perego 2002) and the 
Ratkowsky model best describe the effects 
of pH on the rates of fermentative 
hydrogen production, substrate degradation, 
HPB growth, and some soluble 
metabolite production. The effects of the 
dilution rate on hydrogen production are 
best described by the single-substrate 
model without biomass decay, the single-
substrate model with biomass decay, 
and the dual-substrate model with biomass 
decay (Chen et al. 2001; Whang 
et al. 2006). The Luedeking-Piret model 
and its modified form have been used 
to describe the relationship between the 
growth rate of various HPB cultures, 
such as C. saccharolyticus and Thermotoga 
elfii (van Niel et al. 2002), and 
product formation rate. In addition, it 
has also been used by Mu et al. (2006) 
to describe the relationship between the 

30



rate of substrate degradation and the 
rates of hydrogen production, acetate 
production, and butyrate production.

 
8. Past experiences of AD of OFMSW 

With the rapid development of societies, 
the solid waste generation rate per capita 
is also increasing and consequently becoming 
a matter of universal concern 
to all developing countries. From disruption 
of environmental sustainability 
to uncontrolled litter, which is a cause 
of visual resentment among society 
dwellers, this uncontrolled increase in 
solid waste generation rate has led to 
the exacerbation of various ecological 
problems. The rapid enhancement in the 
process of AD of OFMSW is mainly attributed 
to several successful lab-scale 
studies conducted by various researchers 
over the last two decades. 
Kayhanian and Rich (1995) emphasized 
the requirement of organic-rich nutrients, 
such as wastewater treatment plant 
sludges, dairy manure, and synthetic 
chemical solutions, in AD of OFMSW. 
Upon conducting a high-solids lab-scale 
AD of OFMSW combined with the 
aforesaid nutrients in four different digesters, 
under mesophilic temperature 
range, at a mean OLR of 7.8 g/kg active 
reactor mass/day and with a mass retention 
time (mass retention time can 
be defined as the active reactor mass 
divided by the total wet mass that is 
fed each day) of 25 days, stable performance 
was reported along with improved 
gas production. However, it was 
observed that the reactor treating OFMSW 
with wastewater treatment plant 
sludge and dairy manure, as a nutrient 
supplement, exhibited the most effective 
results. 
Rao and Singh (2004) conducted batch 
digestions of municipal garbage for 100 
days at room temperature (26 [+ or -] 4 
[degrees]C; average temperature 25 [degrees]
C) and at ambient temperature (32 
[+ or -] 10 [degrees]C; average temperature 
29 [degrees]C) conditions, at TS 
concentrations varying from 45 to 135 
g/L to study the effect of organic solids 
concentration and digestion time on biogas 
yield. The said team also observed 
the net bio-energy yield from municipal 
garbage and corresponding bioprocess 
conversion efficiency, over the span of 
the digestion time as 12 528 kJ/kg VS 
and 84.51%, respectively. It was concluded 
that the digesters should preferably 
be run at 67.5 g TS/L under ambient 
temperature, with a digestion time 
close to 60 days for optimum energy 
yield. Hartmann and Ahring (2005) investigated 
AD of OFMSW using two 
4.5 L lab-scale reactors, reactor 1 and 
reactor 2, with an active volume of 3.0 
L, operated under thermophilic conditions 
(55 [degrees]C). Initially OFMSW 
was co-digested with manure, with a 
successively increasing concentration of 
OFMSW, at a HRT of 14-18 days, with 
an OLR of 3.3-4.0 g VS/L per day until 
the adaptation of the co-digestion 
process was established. Gradually, over 
a period of 8 weeks, the ratio of OFMSW 
to manure was slowly increased to 
100% in reactor 1, in addition to recirculating 
the process liquid. In reactor 2 
the co-digestion ratio was maintained as 
50% (V/V). Both the reactors showed 
stable operation with significant gas 
production. 
Forster-Carneiro et al. (2007) investigated 
the effect of inoculum source on thermophilic 
AD of separately collected 
OFMSW, by analyzing the performance 
of laboratory-scale reactors (volume of 
1.1 L), using six different inoculums 
sources: (i) corn silage; (ii) restaurant 
waste digested mixed with rice hulls; 
(iii) cattle excrement; (iv) swine excrement 
(SWINE); (v) digested sludge 
(SLUDGE); and (vi) SWINE mixed 
with SLUDGE (1:1) (SWINE/ 
SLUDGE). These wastes were subjected 
to AD with the operating conditions, 
such as 25% inoculum, 30% TS, and 55 
[degrees]C temperature. The SLUDGE 
was reported to be the best inoculum 
for thermophilic AD of OFMSW, in respect 
of methane yield (L C[H.sub.4]/g 
VS), followed by SWINE/SLUDGE and 
SWINE, against an operating period of 
60 days. In a separate study, Forster- 
Carneiro et al. (2008b) again highlighted 
the influence of sorting technique 
during AD of OFMSW, operated under 
batch mode in thermophilic range and 
dry (20% TS) condition. Two lab-scale 
reactors (5.0 L each) were used for treating 
the SS-OFMSW, obtained from a 
university restaurant and MS-OFMSW, 
obtained from a municipal treatment 
plant located in Cadiz, Spain. The results 
showed that the reactor treating 
SS-OFMSW had a cumulative biogas 
production of 120 L, in approximately 
60 days and the other reactor treating 
MS-OFMSW had a comparatively lower 
biogas yield of 82 L, in 60 days, 
thereby inferring the superiority of the 
source sorting technique in terms of biogas 
yield. 
Fernandez et al. (2008) investigated the 
influence of TS contents during 
mesophilic AD of OFMSW, using labscale 
batch reactors of 1.7 L capacity, 
during a period of 85-95 days. The two 
reactors were operated under two different 
OLR of 931.1 mg DOC/L (20% 
TS) and 1423.4 mg DOC/L (30% TS) 
and the observed results indicated that 
the reactor with low OLR had a superior 
methane production at the end of 
methanogenic phase. Alvarez and Liden 
(2008) made a lab-scale study of the po- 

31



tential of semi-continuous mesophilic 
AD for the treatment of solid slaughterhouse 
waste, FVWs, and manure in a 
co-digestion process. The OLR was examined 
initially, and it was found that 
OLR in the range of 0.3-1.3 
kgVS[m.sup.-3][day.sup.-1] resulted in 
a stable performance with a methane 
yield of 0.3 [m.sup.3][kg.sup.-1] VS 
added and methane content of 54%-56% 
in the biogas. Subsequently, with the 
gradual increase in the OLR the 
methane productivity decreased, indicating 
organic overload or insufficient 
buffering capacity in the digester. In another 
study, Forster-Carneiro et al. 
(2008b) analyzed the bio-methanization 
process of FW from a university campus 
restaurant, in six reactors, with three different 
TS percentages (20%, 25%, and 
30% TS) and two different inoculum 
percentages (20%-30% of mesophilic 
sludge), initially using a lab-reactor with 
volume 1100 mL. After validation of the 
operational parameters, another labscale 
batch reactor, with volume 5 L, 
was employed. The observed results 
showed best performance with respect 
to methane generation for the reactor 
with 20% of TS and 30% of inoculum 
under an acclimation period between 20 
and 60 days for acidogenic/acetogenic 
activity. It was inferred that an enhancement 
of the start-up phase for dry thermophilic 
anaerobic digester treating organic 
FW was essential. 
Cuetos et al. (2008) also investigated 
anaerobic co-digestion of OFMSW with 
slaughterhouse waste in a laboratory 
plant, operated under semi-continuous 
mode and mesophilic temperatures. The 
study showed that AD was a suitable 
technology for efficiently treating lipid 
and protein waste. An HRT of 50 days 
and an OLR of 0.9 
kgVS[m.sup.-3][day.sup.-1] was found 
essential for the efficient start-up and 
sludge acclimation. Consequently, the 
HRT and OLR were adjusted to 25 days 
and 1.70 and 3.70 
kgVS[m.sup.-3][day.sup.-1], respectively, 
in steps, and stable operation with 
83% fat removal was reported, in addition 
to undetectable traces of VFAs and 
long chain fatty acids. A comparative 
study for finding out the effect of atmospheric 
pressure on the performance 
of AD of OFMSW was made by Jiang 
et al. (2010) using two lab-scale reactors, 
treating OFMSW under two different 
pressures: 101 and 65.8 kPa. The 
process performance was evaluated on 
the basis of gas production, gas composition, 
VS degradation, pH, alkalinity, 
VFAs, and ammonia concentration, under 
varying OLR. It was observed that 
pressure had an obvious effect on the 
gas production rate, because the high 
pressurized system produced more biogas 
than the lower one. However, at a 
low HRT, pressure had no obvious effect 
on the gas production rate. Thus, the 
study revealed the feasibility of AD of 
OFMSW in high altitude areas, where 
there is a comparatively low atmospheric 
pressure. Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2011c) 
carried out a labscale study of the stabilization 
of industrial OFMSW using 
semi-continuous completely mixed reactor 
and inferred that the biogas and 
methane production considerably increased, 
in the case of biological pretreatment 
with mature compost. 
Apart from lab-scale studies, several pilot-
scale studies were also carried out 
for the development of AD of OFMSW. 
Bolzonella et al. (2003) conducted a pilot-
scale study on the simulation of the 
start-up phase of the thermophilic semidry 
AD of OFMSW, to aid and shorten 
the start-up phase. MS-OFMSW enriched 
with the putrescent fraction from 
the SS-OFMSW was used in this experiment, 
with a view to simulate the 
substrate, which was dealt with in the 
original plant. The results showed a specific 
gas production of 0.23 
[m.sup.3]/kg[TVS.sub.feed], and a gas 
production rate of 2.1 
[m.sup.3]/[m.sup.3]d, when operated at 
a specific OLR of 0.135 kg 
[TVS.sub.feed]/kg [TVS.sub.reactor] 
day. Fernandez et al. (2005) studied 
anaerobic co-digestion of fats of different 
origin (animal fat, vegetable fat) 
with OFMSW in a pilot plant, operated 
under semi-continuous mode, in the 
mesophilic range (37 [degrees]C) and 
with an HRT of 17 days. They observed 
that the biogas and methane yield after 
substituting the simulated OFMSW, 
which was used for starting up of the digester, 
with animal fats and subsequently 
with vegetable fats were appreciably 
similar to those of the simulated OFMSW. 
This was attributed to the fact that 
both the animal fat and the vegetable 
fat were similar to that of the simulated 
OFMSW, in relation to the long-chain 
fatty acid profile. Davidsson et al. 
(2007) studied the effect of sorting and 
collection systems on the amount of 
methane produced, by conducting thermophilic 
pilot-scale AD of 17 types of 
domestically SS-OFMSW. Each type of 
waste was identified by its origin and 
by pre-sorting, collection, and pre-treatment 
methods. The results reported a 
VS degradation rate of around 80%, and 
a methane yield of 300-400 N[m.sup.3] 
C[H.sub.4]/ton [VS.sub.in], with a retention 
time of 15 days. 
Subsequently, Nopharatana et al. (2007) 
conducted a series of batch experiments 
on AD, whereby the soluble and insoluble 
fractions, and unwashed MSW were 
separately digested in a 220 L stirred 
stainless steel vessel, at a pH of 7.2, un- 

32



der mesophilic temperature regime (38 
[degrees]C). It was found that 7% of 
the total COD arising out of MSW was 
readily soluble, of which 80% was converted 
to biogas, and 50% of the insoluble 
fraction was solubilized. Kim et al. 
(2008) established the practical feasibility 
of a three-stage fermentation system, 
on a commercial level to treat OFMSW, 
thereby contributing to the cause of effective 
disposal and volumetric stabilization 
of the same. A volumetric scaleup 
of this system was designed and built 
on a pilot-scale, providing a total digester 
volume of 10 [m.sup.3]. The results 
from the pilot-scale experiments 
were compared with those from the 
bench-scale study, utilizing a total digester 
volume of 0.4 [m.sup.3], prior to 
field scale-up. The total COD reduction 
was reported to be 90.6% and the maximum 
methane content in the produced 
biogas was reported to be an impressive 
72%, for the bench-scale system. On the 
other hand, the field pilot-scale system 
showed COD reduction and methane 
content as 90.1% and 68%, respectively. 
Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2010) also evaluated 
the start-up and stabilization of AD 
of OFMSW, using a bench-scale configuration 
that consisted of a CSTR, semi-
continuously fed with OFMSW, at 
thermophilic temperature range and dry 
conditions (30% TS). The operating 
conditions (thermophilic and dry) and 
the type of waste were adapted with the 
help of an inoculum from a modified 
SEBAC (sequential batch anaerobic 
composting) system. The process was 
started up directly at thermophilic temperature 
regime and a significant reduction 
in the start-up time and stabilization 
was achieved within 110 days, in comparison 
to 250 days for the processes reported 
elsewhere for the same type of 
waste and digester. 
In a bench-scale study by Fantozzi and 
Buratti (2011), AD and anaerobic biogasification 
potential were tested on 
three different samples of OFMSW 
from waste separation, one as received 
in original, and two obtained after mechanical 
treatment (squeezing): OFMSW 
slurry (liquid fraction) and OFMSW 
(residual solid fraction). The effects of 
inoculum and pH were investigated, and 
it was inferred that the OFMSW slurry 
must be diluted with inoculation, and 
pH control in the start-up phase must be 
ensured to have significant biogas production. 
The effect of AD while treating 
extruded OFMSW was also investigated 
by Novarino and Zanetti (2012) by carrying 
out pilot-scale tests in semi-continuous 
conditions with a stepwise progressive 
increase of the TS content in 
the input material from 3% TS w/w to 
10% TS w/w, using activated sludge as a 
diluting agent. The reactor with 10% TS 
content produced higher specific biogas 
and superior VS removal, inferring 
strong degradation. Zeshan et al. (2012) 
studied the effect of ammonia-N accumulation 
in dry AD of OFMSW, using 
a pilot-scale thermophilic reactor. Biodegradable 
feedstock, such as FW, 
FVW, green waste, and paper waste, 
were used to prepare two simulations 
of C/N ratio: 27 and 32. The process 
performance, in terms of pH, VFA, alkalinity, 
ammonia-N, and biogas yield 
was noted and the results showed that 
the simulation with C/N ratio 32 had 
about 30% less ammonia in the digestate, 
compared to that with C/N ratio 
27. The system was observed to perform 
well up to OLR 7-10 kg VS/[m.sup.3]d, 
against a retention time up to 19 days, 
with surplus energy production of 
50%-73%. Thereafter, Ganesh et al. 
(2013) studied the impact of stepwise 
increase in OLR (up to 7.5 kg 
VS/[m.sup.3]d) on the methane production, 
reactor performance, and solubilized 
organic matter production, using 
high-loaded bench-scale reactors. Specific 
methane yield was higher at the 
lowest OLR and vice versa. 
Recently, in in small localities, municipal 
towns, and cities there have been 
various full-scale applications of AD for 
stabilization or volume reduction of the 
large quantum of generated solid waste, 
and energy recovery (in the form of biogas, 
C[H.sub.4], [H.sub.2]) from it. In 
developing countries, especially in the 
European Union, many anaerobic treatment 
plants, treating OFMSW, have 
been developed in the last decade. In 
an overview of the state-of-the-art development 
of AD of OFMSW, De Baere 
and Mattheeuws (2008) outlined various 
sets of criteria to be followed by European 
treatment plants. It was mentioned 
in the overview that at least 10% of organic 
solid waste from household origin 
was required to be treated in the plant, 
with a minimum capacity of 3000 tons 
per year. They also reviewed a variety 
of considerations regarding the smooth 
and sustainable operation of the treatment 
plants. It was concluded that substantial 
improvements were to be made 
in terms optimization and pre- and posttreatment 
of the end products. The 
anaerobic systems used in those plants 
were predominantly batch reactors and 
one-, two-, or multi-stage continuously 
fed systems, but also included plug-flow 
reactors and three-stage continuous flow 
reactors (Khalid et al. 2011). Those advanced 
bio-reactor systems have significantly 
improved the rate of reaction for 
the treatment of the OFMSW (Bouallagui 
et al. 2003; Mumme et al. 2010; 
Xing et al. 2010). In addition, "co-fermentation" 
or "co-digestion" is preferred 
for the numerous benefits pertain- 

33



ing to the yields of AD of OFMSW 
(Khalid et al. 2011). The various wastes 
that are mixed or co-digested with the 
municipal organic solid waste include 
fat, oil, and grease waste from sewage 
treatment plants (Martin-Gonzalez et al. 
2010), FA (Lo et al. 2012), abattoir 
wastewater (Bouallagui et al. 2009), 
sewage sludge (Sosnowski et al. 2003), 
and slaughterhouse waste (Cuetos et al. 
2008). In the City of Karlsruhe, Germany, 
AD of 7200 tons per year of separately 
collected bio-waste at an OLR of 
up to 8.5 kg COD [m.sup.-3][d.sup.-1], 
proved feasible for co-digestion. Gallert 
et al. (2003) examined the effectiveness 
of AD, in terms of volume reduction 
and process stability, by further increasing 
the bio-waste to 12000 tons per year 
at a higher OLR of 15 kgCOD 
[m.sup.-3][d.sup.-1]. In accordance with 
the lab-scale results, the OLR in the fullscale 
plant was increased to 15 kgCOD 
[m.sup.-3][d.sup.-1], and even after 7 
months of operation, the performance of 
the full-scale digestion plant was consistent 
with the previously obtained laboratory 
results. Based on the preceding literature, 
the process conditions of a few 
important pilot-scale operations of AD 
of OFMSW are summarized in Table 1. 
In addition, the effects of sorting technique 
on gas production and volume reduction, 
in AD of OFMSW are presented 
in Table 2. 
AD of OFMSW produces [H.sub.2] in 
the acidogenesis step. Under anaerobic 
dark conditions using a conventional 
AD process, the production of [H.sub.2] 
is carried out by the fermentative bacteria 
to dispose of excess reducing equivalents 
contained in the organics. During 
anaerobic light conditions, photosynthetic 
fermentative bacteria produce 
[H.sub.2] as a by-product of activity related 
to nitrogenase, which is a common 
enzyme that is necessary for [N.sub.2] 
fixation (Kim and Kim 2011). The main 
advantages of dark fermentation include 
a faster [H.sub.2] production rate than 
photo-fermentation and the direct usage 
of complex and problematic organic 
wastes as a substrate, resulting in enhanced 
economic viability (Kim et al. 
2009). However, the disadvantage is 
that it includes the incomplete decomposition 
of substrates leading to an accumulation 
of organic acids. This, in turn, 
limits the [H.sub.2] yield to less than 
20% of the theoretical maximum value 
of 12 mol [H.sub.2]/mol glucose (D.H. 
Kim et al. 2011). In contrast, photo-fermentation 
allows for near-stoichiometric 
conversion of organic acids to 
[H.sub.2]. Thus, the overall increase in 
the [H.sub.2] yield is possible through a 
sequential fermentation system consisting 
of both dark- and photo-fermentation. 
A recent attempt of this process by 
Liu et al. (2010) and Su et al. (2009) resulted 
in a significant improvement of 
the [H.sub.2] yield, approaching 4-6 
mol [H.sub.2]/mol glucose. However, it 
was observed from these studies that the 
yield still represented less than 50% of 
the theoretical maximum value, which 
may be attributed to the fact that the 
main organic acids, acetate and butyrate, 
produced by dark-fermentation, were 
not favorable substrates for the subsequent 
photo-fermentative [H.sub.2] production. 
This problem was eliminated 
by a three-stage (lactate- + photo- 
[H.sub.2] + C[H.sub.4]) fermentation 
system developed by Kim and Kim 
(2013), which converted FW to 
C[H.sub.4] and [H.sub.2], with an added 
emphasis on achieving high [H.sub.2] 
yield. The system consisted of threestages, 
starting with the fermentation of 
FW to lactate, using indigenous lactic 
acid bacteria, followed by the centrifugation 
of the lactate fermentation effluent. 
In the second stage, the supernatant 
obtained after centrifugation was used 
for [H.sub.2] production by photo-fermentation, 
and in the third stage the 
residue from the centrifugation was used 
for C[H.sub.4] production by AD. It was 
observed that 41% and 37% of the energy 
content in the FW was converted 
to [H.sub.2] and C[H.sub.4], respectively. 
This was corresponding to the electrical 
energy yield of 1146 MJ/ton FW, 
which was 1.4 times higher than that 
of previous two-stage dark ([H.sub.2] + 
C[H.sub.4]) fermentation system. 


9. Scope of energy yield from AD of OFMSW 

Conserving natural resources is becoming 
imperative with the progress of time. 
The dependency on fossil fuels for various 
industrial and commercial activities 
needs to be curtailed as a part of implementation 
of the conservation programme. 
This will not only help in minimizing 
the depletion of exhaustible resources, 
thereby fostering the usage of 
various inexhaustible resources (e.g., 
wind energy, solar energy, tidal energy, 
geothermal energy, hydro-electricity, 
etc.) at a large scale, but will also mitigate 
the various climatic changes caused 
by the emission of GHG. According to 
the second phase of the Kyoto Protocol 
(2012), the industrial countries should 
ensure reduction of GHG emissions by 
at least 18% below the levels found in 
1990, during the 8 year period from 
2013 to 2020. This objective can be 
achieved by using technologies that are 
non-polluting, inexpensive, and are 
based on the previously mentioned inexhaustible 
sources of energy (Saxena et 
al. 2009). AD of OFMSW can be considered 
as one of the most efficient 
modes of renewable energy generation 

34



in this regard. Since its inception, it has 
become a widespread and reliable technology, 
not only in terms of its adeptness 
in striking a balance between generation 
and stabilization of MSW, but also 
in terms of biogas production. Moreover, 
the sludge produced from AD can 
be used as a quality fertilizer and soil 
conditioner. Because there is no dearth 
of MSWs, as those are generated in huge 
proportions daily across the world, sustaining 
this technology would not be an 
issue if its various operational stages are 
managed properly. 
As the process of AD of OFMSW is becoming 
increasingly popular worldwide, 
different modifications are being incorporated 
to enhance the extent of energy 
recovery. It has been observed that the 
important process parameters influencing 
the rate of energy generation are 
OLR, pH, alkalinity, particle size, total 
(TS), temperature, pressure, moisture 
content, VFA production, VS added, 
and nature of the co-substrate or inoculum 
in the case of co-digestion. Sensitive 
methane-producing bacteria depend 
heavily on all of the parameters as well 
as a few others, as reported by scientists 
and researchers since the inception of 
AD of OFMSW. The TS concentration 
also greatly influences the methane 
yield. 
Brummeler and Koster (1989) conducted 
dry AD of OFMSW at a low TS concentration 
and a seed/substrate solids ratio 
of 0.08. They reported an abrupt increase 
in the yield of methane per kilogram 
of organic fraction when several 
pH control chemicals were added at a 
certain buffer/substrate solids ratio. Mata-
Alvarez et al. (1992) performed an 
experimental study on AD of market organic 
wastes in central Barcelona and 
confirmed that the production of 
methane is higher from bio-methanization 
of the organic fraction of the FWs 
from a vegetable market, compared to 
other MSWs. The FWs obtained from 
the marketplace comprised a higher percentage 
of biodegradable material in 
comparison to other domestic MSW, 
which necessarily had a significant percentage 
of non-biodegradable components 
(peels, bones, etc.). As mentioned 
earlier, the nature of the organic substrate 
has an important influence on the 
VS removal and the DOC removal along 
with the methane yield. Kayhanian and 
Rich (1995), while conducting a pilotscale 
study on high solids thermophilic 
AD of OFMSW, emphasized the need 
for macro- and micro-nutrients requirement 
for robust and stable digestion, 
along with significantly high gas production. 
The nutritional deficiencies 
were supplemented by the addition of 
various nutrient-rich organic wastes (cosubstrates), 
such as wastewater treatment 
plant sludge, dairy manure, and 
synthetic chemical solutions, to the substrate 
(OFMSW), that enhanced process 
stability and biogas yield. Stroot et al. 
(2001) and McMahon et al. (2001) studied 
the influence of mixing on the high 
solids AD of OFMSW with pre-thickened 
sewage sludge from wastewater 
treatment plant, and both studies observed 
that biogas production was enhanced 
under reduced mixing condition 
and high OLR. 
It is a well-established fact that anaerobic 
co-digestion of OFMSW with various 
co-substrates has the potential to 
significantly contribute to biogas production 
and operational stability. For example, 
experimental studies by Lastella 
et al. (2002) observed enhanced biogas 
production and its methane content 
when co-digesting semi-solid ortho-fruit 
waste with the recycled digested sludge, 
under anaerobic conditions and a maximum 
retention period. Rao and Singh 
(2004) observed that a digestion time of 
60 days and a TS concentration of 67.5 
mg/L was essential for optimum biogas 
yield, while conducting AD of municipal 
garbage at ambient temperatures (32 
[+ or -] 10 [degrees]C; average temperature 
29 [degrees]C) by Rao and Singh 
(2004). Methane productivity per kilogram 
of COD input was also found to 
increase by increasing the OLR during 
the acidification step, while conducting 
two-phase AD of a mixture of FVW in 
two coupled anaerobic sequencing batch 
reactors, operated at mesophilic temperature 
(Bouallagui et al. 2004). Furthermore, 
Hartmann and Ahring (2005) also 
investigated anaerobic co-digestion of 
OFMSW with manure and 100% AD of 
OFMSW, under mesophilic conditions 
and reported that recirculation of the 
generated leachate from one reactor to 
another resulted in stable reactor performance 
with significant VS reduction 
(while treating 100% OFMSW) as well 
as considerable biogas yield per ton of 
waste. Thereafter, Fernandez et al. 
(2005) conducted pilot-scale studies of 
anaerobic co-digestion of simulated 
OFMSW with fats of animal and vegetable 
origin (high lipid content) and 
concluded that after a particular adaptation 
period with simulated OFMSW, 
the co-digestion with fat increases the 
amount of biogas produced per kilogram 
of TVS degraded. Similar results were 
obtained by Cuetos et al. (2008) when 
anaerobic co-digestion of slaughterhouse 
waste and OFMSW were conducted. 
However, they concluded that 
for anaerobic co-digestion to happen 
successfully at a low HRT and high 
OLR, the inoculum needed to be acclimated 
to a high fat and high ammonia 
content medium for a longer HRT and 

35



low OLR at the start-up phase, and then 
switching to low HRT and high OLR 
should be followed once the digester 
was stabilized. 
Angelidaki et al. (2006) found that using 
a low fresh TS content resulted in the 
maximum methane yield and best degradation 
rates of SS-OFMSW, after carrying 
out anaerobic batch digestion of SSOFMSW 
under thermophilic conditions. 
Experimental studies on three-stage 
methane fermentation of OFMSW by 
Kim et al. (2006) revealed that biogas 
and methane production rates in thermophilic 
digesters were higher than 
those in mesophilic digesters, irrespective 
of HRT, even though the results indicated 
that AD of FW yielded appreciable 
methane under a thermophilic temperature 
range compared to a mesophilic 
temperature range, with a 10-day HRT. 
It was also observed from the study that 
liquor FW showed higher removal of 
soluble COD under thermophilic conditions 
with the highest removal achieved 
at 50 [degrees]C, thereby indicating the 
influence of temperature on the soluble 
COD removal. Nopharatana et al. 
(2007) conducted an experimental study 
pertaining to batch-slurry AD, where the 
soluble and the insoluble fractions along 
with the unwashed MSW were digested 
separately. This study observed that the 
particle sizes between 2 and 50 mm did 
not affect the rate of digestion and 
methane yield. In addition, it was concluded 
that the rapidity of digestion of 
the insoluble fractions can be increased 
by acclimatizing the culture with soluble 
fractions having higher biodegradable 
potentials followed by digestion of the 
insoluble fractions. Capela et al. (2008) 
confirmed that there was a considerable 
increase in the methane production and 
VS removal when the proportion of 
OFMSW (substrate) was increased during 
anaerobic co-digestion with industrial 
sludge and cattle manure, under 
mesophilic conditions. Forster-Carneiro 
et al. (2008b) carried out thermophilic 
AD of different organic matter like FW, 
SS-OFMSW, and OFMSW and observed 
that the methane yield was higher 
for FW. They also deemed that SSOFMSW 
was superior, in the production 
of biogas than MS-OFMSW by analyzing 
the performance of two lab-scale reactors 
treating SS-OFMSW and MSOFMSW 
under thermophilic temperatures 
and at a constant TS concentration. 
In a study by Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2010) 
it was observed that the thermophilic 
dry AD (at 30% TS) of OFMSW resulted 
in greater methane production than 
wet mesophilic AD of OFMSW, at 
5%-10% TS conditions. Dong et al. 
(2010) observed an impaired methane 
yield once again with low TS concentration 
while conducting semi-dry 
mesophilic AD of WS-OFMSW. It was 
concluded that, in terms of methane 
yield, WS-OFMSW remained between 
MS-OFMSW and SS-OFMSW. At the 
same time, Schievano et al. (2010) 
showed that HSAD of OFMSW resulted 
in a better yield of biogas per kilogram 
of VS, only when the putrescibility 
([O.sub.2] consumption in 20 h 
biodegradation, [OD.sub.20]) of the organic 
fraction was under a certain value. 
Not only the nature of the waste, but 
also pretreatment of the waste, is vital 
in the context of greater biogas yield. 
Fdez.-Guelfo et al. (2011c) revealed that 
biological pretreatment of industrial 
OFMSW with mature composts, followed 
by dry thermophilic AD, yielded 
the highest cumulative biogas and 
methane production. Later on, Fantozzi 
and Buratti (2011) conducted AD of 
MS-OFMSW and showed that biogas 
production was improved when the 
OFMSW slurry was diluted and inoculated. 
Novarino and Zanetti (2012) performed 
the pilot-scale AD of extruded 
OFMSW (treatment of OFMSW by exerting 
pressure so that the undesired 
fractions of waste get separated from the 
organic waste) and concluded that the 
biogas-specific production tended to enhance 
by increasing the TS content of 
the input material. Anaerobic co-digestion 
of FW, FVW, and dewatered 
sewage sludge was conducted by Liu 
et al. (2012a) and it was reported that 
a high biogas production rate of 4.25 
[m.sup.3][([m.sup.3]d).sup.-1] was obtained, 
at an OLR of 6.0 kg VS 
[([m.sup.3]d).sup.-1]. It was also observed 
that a total of 16.5% of lipids 
content was beneficial to the biogas production 
of the feedstock without causing 
inhibition to the AD. Zhang and Banks 
(2012) co-digested mechanically recovered 
OFMSW with slaughterhouse 
wastes and observed that it was useful 
in achieving a volumetric methane productivity 
of 1.25 STP 
[m.sup.3][m.sup.-3][d.sup.-1], at a loading 
rate of 4 kg VS [m.sup.-3][d.sup.-1]. 
Zhang and Banks (2013) studied the impact 
of different particle size distributions 
on AD of OFMSW and it was concluded 
that differences in the particle 
size distribution did not change the specific 
biogas yield; instead the digester 
performance was affected. It was also 
found that the SMP in the "dry" digesters 
was slightly lower than in the 
"wet" digesters when processing the 
same material. Zeshan et al. (2012) studied 
the effect of C/N ratio and ammonia- 
N accumulation in a pilot-scale inclined 
thermophilic dry anaerobic digester. It 
was observed that the inclined thermophilic 
dry anaerobic digester performed 
better with the various OLRs 
and produced 200-300 L C[H.sub.4]/kg 

36



VS. However, the free ammonia concentration 
was found to inhibit the 
steady-state methane production in inclined 
thermophilic dry anaerobic digester. 
Ganesh et al. (2013) investigated 
the impact of stepwise increase in OLR, 
up to 7.5 kg VS/[m.sup.3]d, on methane 
production in a high-loading reactor. It 
was observed that the volumetric biogas 
and methane production increased significantly 
with the increase in the OLR.

 
10. Applicability of AD for management of MSW under Indian scenario 

The gradual improvement in the economic 
growth coupled with the rapid urbanization 
has led to a high standard of 
living, even in a developing country like 
India. This has invariably resulted in an 
increased rate of annual MSW generation. 
Table 3, (status of MSW generation, 
collection, treatment, and disposal 
in class-I cities, CPCB 2000b) representing 
the MSW generation rates in different 
states in India, gives a clear idea 
regarding the need for an efficient MSW 
management strategy. In this context, 
AD can not only strike a balance between 
the generation and stabilization 
rate of the MSW but can also cater to 
the energy needs of a society, especially 
in a developing country like India. It 
is evident that in the developed countries, 
such as those within the European 
Union, where the per-capita generation 
rate of MSW is much higher (in the 
range of 1.5-2.0 kg/day), AD is a must 
for the stabilization of the generated 
MSW. In a developing country like India, 
AD is also equally necessary because 
the population is much higher and 
the land needed for other classical management 
strategies is decreasing day-byday. 
Apart from that, the effectiveness 
of AD largely depends on the physical, 
chemical, and biological characterization 
of the generated MSW. The selection 
of AD over composting, sanitary 
landfilling, and thermal incineration is 
dictated mainly by the organic nature of 
the MSW. The physical and chemical 
characterizations of MSW in various Indian 
cities are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively 
(NEERI Report (1996) strategy 
paper on SWM in India, 1995). Table 
4 (Status of solid waste generation, collection, 
treatment and disposal in metro 
cities, CPCB 2000a) highlights the differences 
in MSW characteristics, with 
the effect of urbanization and development 
in various Indian metrocities. The 
major fraction of MSW in urban areas 
is compostable matter (40%-60%) and 
inert materials (30%-50%). However, 
there is a gradual increase in the relative 
percentage of organic matter present in 
the MSW, with a decrease in socio-economic 
status (Sharholy et al. 2008). 
Apart from that, in the various developed 
cities and towns, the rapid increase 
in the number of marketplaces (fish 
market, fruit and vegetables market, 
etc.) is also massively contributing to 
the quantity of organic fraction in the 
generated MSW, on a daily basis. AD is 
mainly concerned with the presence of 
organic material in the MSW to be treated. 
Hence, it can be a suitable methodology 
for treatment of the OFMSW in various 
suburban, as well as urban, areas of 
India. 
In many metropolitan cities and towns 
of India, there are numerous scenarios 
of open and uncontrolled dumping of 
MSW. More than 90% of the generated 
MSW is directly disposed of on land 
in an unsatisfactory manner (Das et al. 
1998). The shortage of land in the large 
and congested towns or cities, like Delhi, 
also contributes to unsatisfactory 
landfilling activities (Mor et al. 2006; 
Siddiqui et al. 2006; Sharholy et al. 
2006; Gupta et al. 1998; Kansal et al. 
1998). Selection of landfill sites far 
away from these cities may upset the 
viability of the operation owing to significant 
increase in transportation costs 
(Singh et al. 2011). The principles of 
sanitary landfilling are seldom followed 
as the generated MSW is disposed of 
by filling in low-lying areas (Singh et 
al. 2011; Sharholy et al. 2008). Unlike 
the developed countries, in developing 
countries, such as India, the system of 
landfilling is neither properly managed 
nor is it techno-economically feasible. 
The important practices pertaining to 
landfilling operation, such as lining of 
suitable membrane liners along the excavated 
portions, compaction and levelling 
of waste, final covering by earth 
material, etc., are rarely observed. Absence 
of suitable leachate collection system 
leads to contamination of ground 
and surface water (Bhide and Shekdar 
1998; Gupta et al. 1998). In coastal 
towns, improper and unsatisfactory 
landfilling leads to rapid leaching of 
heavy metals and toxic substances into 
the coastal waters (Singh et al. 2011; 
Sharholy et al. 2008). Also, the absence 
of proper landfill gas monitoring and 
collection equipment may sometimes 
lead to spontaneous ignition or explosions, 
due to high concentrations 
methane buildup in the atmosphere 
(Singh et al. 2011). Apart from that, the 
uncontrolled emission of the GHG into 
the atmosphere significantly contributes 
to global warming. In some instances, 
landfill sites meant for domestic waste 
are also found to be filled with industrial 
waste (Datta 1997). In India, landfilling 
is a widely practiced mode of MSW disposal. 
Hence, the previously mentioned 
problems project landfilling as a not-soefficient 
technology in the management 
of MSW. Therefore, a suitable method- 

37



ology, such as that of AD, is the most 
obvious and effective substitute for 
landfilling, particularly for future scenarios 
in India. 
Also, other processes of MSW management, 
such as composting, thermal incineration, 
and pyrolysis or gasification, 
have not been able to completely solve 
the problems associated with the comprehensive 
management and handling of 
MSW. In the case of pyrolysis or gasification, 
which necessarily takes place 
under sub-stoichiometric condition 
(gasification) or in the complete absence 
of oxygen (pyrolysis or destructive distillation), 
the production of the gaseous 
product largely depends on the nature 
of the MSW to be treated. MSW has 
been reported to constitute 15%-63% of 
FW worldwide (Kim et al. 2009). FWs 
are characterized by moisture content as 
high as 75%-93%. Excessive moisture 
adversely affects the net energy recovery. 
As such, the OFMSW usually possesses 
a high quantity of moisture, 
which is why pyrolysis or gasification 
cannot be looked upon as a superior 
method for the stabilization of the OFMSW. 
Moreover, the generated pyrolysis 
oil, by virtue of its high viscosity, often 
poses different problems during its 
transportation and burning (Singh et al. 
2011). In contrast to pyrolysis or gasification, 
thermal incineration requires 
auxiliary fuel support to sustain the 
process of combustion. The thermal energy 
produced can only be utilized in 
heating boilers. Moreover, there is an 
involvement of high capital and operation 
and maintenance cost, in addition 
to the requirement of skilled personnel. 
This is because the control of the release 
of harmful gases and particulate matter 
into the atmosphere requires wellequipped 
incinerators and other appropriate 
pollution control accessories. In 
addition, the overall efficiency in the 
case of small power stations is extremely 
low. Unlike thermal incineration, the 
process of AD does not require any external 
supply of oxygen, nor is there any 
chance of noxious gas release into the 
atmosphere and the scope of marketing 
the end products is also positive. Hence, 
compared to sanitary landfilling and 
thermal incineration, the techno-economic 
viability of AD can be regarded 
as the best option of MSWM in a developing 
country like India. 
Fig. 6. Physical characterizations 
of MSWs in Indian cities withpopulation 
range above 5 million.paper 
4.71%rubber, 
leather and synthetics 
0.71%glass 
0.46%metals 
0.49%total compostable matter 
38.95%inert 
9.95%others 
44.73%Note: Table made from pie 
chart.Fig. 7. Chemical characterizations 
of MSWs in Indian cities withpopulation 
range above 5 million.
moisture 
38.72%zorganic matter 
39.07%nitrogen as total nitrogen 
0.56%phosphorous as 
0.52%phosphorous pentoxidepotassium 
as potassiumoxide 
0.52%others 
20.61%Note: 
Table made from pie chart. 
Since the 1960s the process of composting 
has gained considerable importance 
in India. This practice was encouraged 
in the early initiatives of the Government 
of India in the management of 
MSW in urban areas (Sharholy et al. 
2008). Composting can be defined as 
the biological decomposition of the 
biodegradable OFMSW under controlled 
conditions to a state sufficiently 
stable for nuisance-free storage and handling, 
and for safe use in land applications. 
Composting has the ability to 
reduce waste volume by 50%-85% 
(Sharholy et al. 2008). Even though a 
considerable number of treatment plants 
have been built in various key places 
in India, such as Delhi, Bangalore, 
Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Bhopal, Lucknow, 
Gwalior, Indore, Baroda, Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Jaipur, and Kanpur, the 
long-term acceptability of the process is 
on a gradual decline because of several 
inherent problems. This is attributed to 
the facts that a large area is required for 
the construction of a composting plant, 
external supply of oxygen is required 
in the case of aerobic composting, and 
leachate management is required in 
some cases. Apart from that, other important 
issues associated with composting 
include improper control, in the case 
of windrow composting, leading to 
spreading of biological odors and improper 
management, leading to the potential 
existence of pathogens in the 
marketed products. In this context, involvement 
of shredders may lead to 
heavy metal toxicity in the marketed 
products. Unlike AD, composting does 
not facilitate the production of methane 
and hydrogen. It is evident from the literature 
that composting in India constitutes 
only 9% of the MSW treatment. 
Hence, there is a definite possibility of 
AD being perceived as a better and more 
efficient technology, thereby substituting 
the process of composting. 


11. Overall future prospect of AD of OFMSW 

As discussed earlier, since the discovery 
of MSW undergoing AD in sanitary 
landfills in the early 1970s, the process 
witnessed several improvements in the 

38



next decade and a half (i.e., between 
mid-1970s and 1990). This invariably 
resulted in the development of different 
systems, such as "Valorga" (de Laclos 
et al. 1997), "Kompogas" (Wellinger et 
al. 1993), "Dranco" (Six and De Baere 
1992), "BRV" (Lissens et al. 2001), and 
"BTA" (Verma 2002; Rahn and Gandolfi 
2007), capable of treating the solid 
organic waste in an anaerobic environment. 
Further, pilot- and lab-scale studies 
based on those processes eventually 
led to the construction of numerous 
commercial plants across Europe 
(Netherlands, Switzerland, Belgium, 
Italy, Spain, Germany, UK, France, etc.) 
and North America (USA, Canada). The 
crucial modifications, which essentially 
proved to be imperative in the development 
of this process, include shifting 
to the thermophilic temperature regime 
from the mesophilic temperature 
regime, improvement of the startup 
phase by employment of certain inoculum, 
application of several types of enzymes 
for increasing the rate of degradation 
of the OFMSW during the hydrolysis 
stage, subjecting the OFMSW 
to different types of pre-treatment prior 
to the main digestion process, and adoption 
of several types of sorting techniques 
(SS, MS, WS) in segregating or 
separating the OFMSW prior to treatment. 
Another major modification of 
AD for the stabilization of OFMSW was 
co-digestion. At the beginning, when 
OFMSW was digested alone, there was 
a noticeable failure regarding the gas 
production. The importance of co-digestion 
was not discovered until the studies 
conducted by Golueke and McGadhey 
(1971) and Pfeffer and Liebmann (1976) 
demonstrated the advantages of mixing 
MSW and sewage sludge, with regard 
to improving the process efficiency and 
enhancing the gas production (Cecchi 
and Traverso 1986). The importance of 
co-digestion or mixing of the OFMSW 
(substrate) with another type co-substrate 
is essentially attributed to the fact 
that the consortium of bacteria responsible 
for the degradation and eventual 
conversion of the waste into biogas become 
rapidly acclimated. Also, in some 
cases when there is not enough initial 
moisture available in the MSW to be 
treated, co-digestion helps in the compensation 
of the moisture quantity up to 
the desirable level, by the addition of 
another moisture-rich substrate, thereby 
emphasizing the importance of hydrolysis, 
as the rate-limiting step. Compensation 
of the essential nutrients required 
for the operational stability of the overall 
process is also another facet of co-digestion, 
which can be considered as vital. 
Apart from enhancing the gas production 
and rendering operational stability, 
co-digestion has also proved to 
be economically advantageous because 
it has provided the scope for treating 
two or more types of waste in a single 
facility by sharing the same equipment, 
thereby enabling easier handling of 
mixed waste and increasing the economy 
of sale (Mata-Alvarez et al. 2000). 
The ability of AD to treat a large amount 
of municipal solid organic waste within 
a small space also provides significant 
leeway in the efficient handling of whatever 
quantity of waste is generated on a 
daily basis in a particular town or city. 
The mushroom-like development of 
cities and towns are creating a "spacecrunch" 
for sustaining classical methods 
of disposal (like landfilling, composting). 
Furthermore, the management and 
operational problems associated with 
sanitary landfilling, pyrolysis or gasification, 
thermal incineration, and composting 
have led to the increased acceptability 
of AD. AD is superior to pyrolysis 
or gasification, in treating organic 
waste with low calorific-value (generated 
in large quantities in a developing 
country like India). Also, unlike thermal 
incineration it does not require an external 
supply of air for sustaining the 
operation. Apart from that, the closed 
or sealed operational environment prevents 
the escape of leachate and GHG, 
unlike composting and thermal incineration. 
Thus it can be concluded that techno-
economic viability of AD is greater 
than other conventional MSWM techniques. 
As mentioned before, AD requires 
a smaller space in comparison to 
other processes for treatment of an enormous 
quantity of waste, thereby reducing 
the carbon footprint. 
The biogas produced from AD can be 
used for generating electricity with the 
help of high quality, costly fuel cells. It 
accounts for 0.5% of the electricity generation 
in the UK and 1% of the electricity 
output in the USA (Xuereb 1997). 
As well, the produced biogas can be directly 
used up to generate electricity and 
steam. However, the economic viability 
of generating electricity through this 
produced biogas is still under question, 
owing to the involvement of the costly 
fuel cells. Apart from generating electricity, 
the biogas is also viewed as an 
environmentally attractive alternative to 
diesel and gasoline for operating public 
transit systems, and in the operation of 
internal combustion engines. It is used 
in the same manner as compressed natural 
gas for fueling light- and heavy-duty 
vehicles. It has been reported that usage 
of biogas as a substitute for diesel 
and gasoline has greatly reduced the 
emission of fumes and [NO.sub.x] from 
automobile exhaust. In addition, the 
sound generated from methane-powered 
engines is generally much lower than 
diesel-operated engines, thereby con- 

39



trolling noise pollution. The hydrogen 
produced has a wide spectrum of applications 
as an energy source at both the 
industrial and commercial levels. The 
aforesaid form of non-conventional energy 
plays a crucial role in mitigating 
the present and future energy crisis. The 
sludge produced also can be used as an 
effective soil conditioner. Instead of 
costly chemical fertilizers, farmers can 
look forward to using this inexpensive 
soil conditioner, thereby preventing 
degradation of the soil quality. Today it 
is clear that overdoses of chemical or inorganic 
fertilizers jeopardize soil quality 
and endanger crop life, due to the increased 
toxicity levels of certain chemicals. 
In addition, surface runoff can adversely 
affect aquatic life. Hence, it is 
advisable to use this naturally procured 
soil conditioner as an organic amendment 
for the betterment or safeguard of 
the environment. The production of a 
number of commercial and full-scale 
plants based on the AD of OFMSW 
across the globe is a certain indication of 
the credibility of the process to be an indispensable 
form of MSWM technique 
as well as an energy-generating option 
for the future. 


12. Concluding remarks 

The present review clearly reveals the 
importance of AD of OFMSW in terms 
of its compatibility in stabilizing OFMSW. 
The various advantages of AD, 
such as low requirement of space and 
driving energy, zero emission of GHG, 
and the ability to treat huge quantities of 
waste, makes it an obvious choice over 
other conventional MSWM techniques. 
It can be concluded that with the gradual 
development of this process many new 
modifications, such as co-digestion with 
several types of other wastes and adequate 
mixing and pre-treatment of the 
OFMSW prior to AD, have resulted in a 
wide range of environmental footprints. 
Improvement of the startup phase by 
employing certain inoculum, adopting 
various sorting techniques, and selection 
of thermophilic rather than mesophilic 
temperature regimes has ultimately resulted 
in a substantial enhancement of 
biogas production and a volumetric reduction 
of the generated OFMSW. As 
far as the energy utilization is concerned, 
from electricity generation to 
powering of automobiles, all these can 
be supported by AD of OFMSW. All of 
these essentialities coupled with many 
other factors make AD of OFMSW a 
basic tool in terms of comprehensive 
MSWM. Nevertheless, the process has 
not yet been implemented on a large 
scale in developing countries, due to a 
relatively high initial cost and sophisticated 
operation and maintenance. Other 
reasons, which have possibly prevented 
the large-scale implementation of AD of 
OFMSW, are the sensitivity of the reactors 
to pH and temperature and the storage 
of the produced gas, all of which require 
efficient monitoring. If all of these 
factors are provided for, AD may prove 
to be an invaluable technology for the 
treatment of the MSW in both developing 
and developed countries all over the 
world.

40


