Anaerobic digestion of food waste: 
Current status, problems and an alternative product 



1. INTRODUCTION

Anaerobic digestion (Anaerobic Digestion) is historically one of the oldest processing technologies used by 
mankind. Until the 1970s, it was commonly used only in the wastewater treatment plants 
waste management (Palmisano at al. 1996). The amount of generated solid waste 
continuously increases and due to the large environmental impacts of its improper 
treatment, its management has become an environmental and social concern. Food waste 
comprises 12.4 % of the total municipal solid waste (municipal solid waste), according to U.S. EPA 
estimates. This corresponds to over 40 million tons, according to the 2006 State of Garbage 
survey of BioCycle and Columbia University (Arsova et al. 2008). Also, EPA has estimated 
that less than a million tons are co-composted aerobically with yard waste (EPA 2007). 
Rapid biodegrAnaerobic Digestionation of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste is of key importance to identify 
environmental more responsible way to process it rather than landfilling or composting it. 
Anaerobic digestion has the Anaerobic Digestionvantage of biogas production and can le anaerobic Digestion to efficient 
resource recovery and contribution to the conservation of non-renewable energy sources. 
Furthermore, anaerobic digestion is closed and controlled process and based on fugitive 
emissions is more preferable than landfilling and aerobic composting (Levis et al. 2010). 
Even though proven to be effective for treating organics, anaerobic digestion plants are 
facing difficulties in obtaining fairly clean feedstock that results in technical difficulties 
with the equipment and poor compost quality. Furthermore, the economic feasibility of 
these plants has been questioned due to the high investment and operation costs. Also 
there are more than 40 different Anaerobic Digestion technologies available on the market and it is 
challenging to identify the best one (Kelleher 2007). 
In this study we have reviewed the anaerobic digestion reactions and examined the Anaerobic Digestion 
technologies that are available on the market, in order to identify the most efficient one. 
Having in mind the difficulties Anaerobic Digestion plants are facing in practice and the increased interest in 
finding a sustainable supplemental carbon source for denitrification in the wastewater 
treatment plants (WWTP), we have also tested the possibility to link these two processes 
by means of laboratory. This experimental study investigated the possibility to use the 
volatile fatty acids (VFA), naturally produced in the process of anaerobic acidogenesis from 
the food waste, as supplemental carbon source for denitrification in the waste water 
treatment plants (WWTP). This experimental study was conducted over a period of ten 
months and we examined the possibility to stop the Anaerobic Digestion reaction before the methanogenesis 
and insteAnaerobic Digestion of methane to produce VFAs. Furthermore we tested the product of this 
experiment as a supplemental carbon source for denitrification of wastewater. The 
methods, materials and detailed results are elaborated in this study. All tons reported in 
this study refer to metric tons.

9 





2. ANAEROBIC DIGESTION PROCESS 

Anaerobic digestion (Anaerobic Digestion) is a microbial decomposition of organic matter into methane, 
carbon dioxide, inorganic nutrients and compost in oxygen depleted environment and 
presence of the hydrogen gas. This process, also known as bio-methanogenesis, occurs 
naturally in wetlands, rice fields, intestines of animals, manures and aquatic sediments, and 
is responsible for the carbon cycle in the ecosystems. 
Natural and anthropogenic sources account for 30 and 70 %, respectively, of the total 
methane released in the atmosphere every year. Major natural sources of methane are the 
wetlands and animal guts (mainly insects and ruminants) while the main anthropogenic 
sources have been identified in the fossil fuel processing industries, rice fields and landfills. 
Biological activity has been identified to be the cause for more than 80% of the flux of the 
atmospheric methane (Palmisano et al. 1996). 
In general there are three different methanogenic ecosystems in the nature (Figure 1) : 
(a) in lacustrine and marine sediments, marshes, swamps, rice soils, sludge and digesters 
where the organic matter is completely degrAnaerobic Digestioned; (b) in ruminants and intestinal tracts of 
almost all living creatures (e.g. humans, insects, termites), where the process of 
mineralization is incomplete and most of the intermediate products (e.g. volatile fatty 
acids) are absorbed into the bloodstream; (c) in absence of organic matter (e.g. hot 
springs) where methanogenesis occurs only from geochemical hydrogen formed as part of 
the geological process (Garcia et al. 2000). 
Figure 1 Schematic diagram of three different methanogenic ecosystems in nature (Garcia et al. 2000) 

10


 
In Figure 1, the solid arrows show the reactions that occur and the dashed arrows show the 
reactions that do not occur in the specific ecosystem. 
Humans have harnessed bio-methanogenesis for rapid and controlled decomposition of 
organic waste and biomass feedstock to methane, carbon dioxide and stabilized residue. 
In the generalized scheme of the anaerobic digestion, the feedstock is harvested or 
collected, coarsely shredded and placed into a reactor with active inoculums of 
methanogenic microorganisms. Since the methane is a significant greenhouse gas, 
anaerobic digestion has higher control over the methane production and contributes to 
lower the carbon footprint of the food waste management in the way that the fugitive 
emissions are lower than then the emissions in the cases of the landfilling and aerobic 
composting (Levis et al. 2010). 
Generally three main reactions occur during the entire process of the anaerobic digestion 
to methane: hydrolysis, acid forming and methanogenesis. Although Anaerobic Digestion can be considered 
to take place in three stages all reactions occur simultaneously and are interdependent. 
In the experimental study to be described later, we shortened the Anaerobic Digestion process at the end of 
the acid forming stage, because the goal was to produce volatile fatty acids and avoid 
methane production. Methanogenesis was not important in our experimental study but is 
described below in order to provide the complete picture of the Anaerobic Digestion process. 


2.1 Hydrolysis 

Hydrolysis is a reaction that breaks down the complex organic molecules into soluble 
monomers (constituents), Figure 2, Stage 1. This reaction is catalyzed by enzymes excreted 
from the hydrolytic and fermentative bacteria (cellulase, protease and lipase). End 
products of this reaction are soluble sugars, amino acids; glycerol and long- chain 
carboxylic acids (Ralph & Dong 2010). 
Approximate chemical formula for the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste (municipal solid waste) 
is C6H10O4 (Shefali & Themelis 2002). 
Hydrolysis reaction of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste can be represented by the following 
reaction: 


2.2 Acid-forming stage 

This stage is facilitated by microorganisms known as acid formers that transform the 
products of the hydrolysis into simple organic acids such as acetic, propionic and butyric 
acid as well as ethanol, carbon dioxide and hydrogen. (Figure 2, Stage 2) 
Acid forming stage comprises two reactions, fermentation and the acetogenesis reactions. 
During the fermentation the soluble organic products of the hydrolysis are transformed 
into simple organic compounds, mostly volatile (short chain) fatty acids such as propionic, 
formic, butyric, valeric etc, ketones and alcohols. 
Typical reactions occurring at this stage are the following: 
- Conversion of the glucose to ethanol: 
- Conversion of the glucose to propionate: 
The acetogenesis is completed through carbohydrate fermentation and results in acetate, 
CO2 and H2, compounds that can be utilized by the methanogens. The presence of hydrogen 
is of critical importance in acetogenesis of compounds such as propionic and butyric acid.
These reactions can only proceed if the concentration of H2 is very low (Ralph & Dong  
2010). Thus the presence of hydrogen scavenging bacteria is essential to ensure the 
thermodynamic feasibility of this reaction (Ostrem & Themelis 2004).
Figure 2 Anaerobic Digestion process reactions 
Important reactions during the acetogenesis stage are as follow (Ostrem & Themelis 2004):
- Conversion of glucose to acetate: 
- Conversion of ethanol to acetate: 
- Conversion of propionate to acetate: 
- Conversion of bicarbonate to acetate: 


2.3 Methanogenesis 

Methanogenesis is a reaction facilitated by the methanogenic microorganisms that convert
soluble mater into methane. Two thirds of the total methane produced is derived  
converting the acetic acid or by fermentation of alcohol formed in the second stage, such as

11 



methanol. The other one third of the produced methane is a result of the reduction of the 
carbon dioxide by hydrogen. Considering that the methane has high climate change 
potential the goal is to find an alternative in order to lower the environmental foot print of 
the organic waste treatment. Therefore in the experimental part we avoided this stage and 
insteAnaerobic Digestion of methane we targeted the production of volatile fatty acids. 
The reactions that occur during this stage are as follows (Ostrem & Themelis 2004): 
- Acetate conversion: 
Followed by:
- Methanol conversion 
- Carbon dioxide reduction by hydrogen 
The amount of methane that can be expected to be produced can be calculated as (Parkin & 
Owen 1986): 
In the case of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste this reaction would be as follows: 





3. BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS IN ANAEROBIC DIGESTION

The conversion of complex organic matter to methane and carbon dioxide is possible only 
by the common action of at least four different groups of microorganisms (MO). The 
essential microbial complex is comprised of hydrolytic bacteria, fermenting bacteria, 
acetogenic bacteria and methanogenic Archaea. These groups of MO have established 
syntrophic relationships where the later members of the food chain depend on the 
previous for their substrates, but also they may have significant influence on the earlier 
members in the chain by removing the metabolic products (Garcia et al. 2000). 
The first group of MO consist the hydrolytic bacteria. These organisms catalyze the 
hydrolysis reaction through the extracellular hydrolytic enzymes they excrete. The 
resulting monomers from this reaction undergo fermentation directly to acetate, or 
through the pathway of the volatile fatty acids and alcohols facilitated by the so-called 
secondary fermenters or obligate proton reducers (Ralph & Dong 2010). These bacteria 
convert their substrates to acetate, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and perhaps formate, which 
are subsequently used by the methanogens (Schink 1997).

 
3.1. Hydrolytic bacteria 

BiodegrAnaerobic Digestionable polymers found in the municipal solid waste include lignocelluloses, proteins, lipids and 
starch. Specialized microbial population of hydrolytic bacteria is responsible for 
depolymerization of these organic polymers towards their building compounds, 

12



monomers. Usually this is found to be the slowest and the rate limiting step in the overall 
anaerobic digestion process. Furthermore, the ultimate methane yield is directly 
dependant on the efficiency of this reaction (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). 
Extracellular microbial enzymes catalyzing this reaction are known as hydrolyses or lyses. 
Depending on the type of the reaction they catalyze, these hydrolyses can be esterase 
(enzymes that hydrolyze ester bonds), glycosidase (enzymes that hydrolyze glycosides 
bonds), or peptidase (enzymes that hydrolyze peptide bonds). For example, lipases 
hydrolyze the ester bonds of lipids to produce fatty acids and glycerol. Lyses, on the other 
side, catalyze the non-hydrolytic removal of groups from substrates (Palmisano & Barlaz 
1996). 
Lignocellulose refers to the three major components of the plant tissue: cellulose, 
hemicelluloses and lignin. The cellulose and hemicelluloses are biodegrAnaerobic Digestionable and make up 
over 90% of the biochemical methane potential of the municipal solid waste, while the phenolic groups in 
lignin are even inhibitory to the enzymes. Cellulose is degrAnaerobic Digestioned by hydrolyses to yield a 
soluble disaccharide, cellobiose, which on further hydrolysis results in D-glucose. The 
cellulolytic enzyme system is composed of endoglucanases, exoglucanases, and 
glucosidases. The main anaerobic bacteria degrAnaerobic Digestioning cellulose include Bacterioides 
succinogenes, Clostridium lochhAnaerobic Digestionii, Clostridium cellobioporus, Ruminococcus flavefaciens, 
Ruminococcus albus, Butyrivibrio fibrosolvens, Clostridium thermocellum, Clostridium 
stercorarium and Micromonospora bispora (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). 

13



Figure 3 Overall process of anaerobic decomposition after MAnaerobic Digestionigan et al., 2003 

14


 
Hemicelluloses are simpler structured and more reAnaerobic Digestionily degrAnaerobic Digestionable then cellulose by 
anaerobic microbes. Despite that, its depolymerization requires complex enzyme system 
due to the various monomers comprising it. The predominant bacteria found to degrAnaerobic Digestione 
the hemicelluloses in the rumen are Bacterioides ruminicola. B. fibrisolvens, R. flavenfaciens, 
and R. albus (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). Pectin represents an important group of 
hemicelluloses in young plant tissues, berries and fruit. Several Clostridium species have 
been identified as pectinolytic as well as rumen bacteria like Bacteroides rumenicola, and 
Streptococcus bovis (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). Lignin is highly branched, aromatic 
polymer whose depolymeryzation le anaerobic Digestions to monomers that can be used by the anaerobic 
bacteria in several anaerobic energy-yielding processes such as anoxygenic photosynthesis, 
denitrification, sulfate reduction, fermentation and methanogenesis. However, it is still 
doubtful whether lignin can be depolymerized to its monomers under Anaerobic Digestion conditions 
(Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). 
In anaerobic digesters, proteins serve as a source of carbon and energy for bacteria growth 
and a source of nitrogen. Proteins are hydrolyzed by proteolytic enzymes to peptides, 
amino acids, ammonia, and carbon dioxide. It has been shown that a specialized groups of 
anaerobic bacteria such as the proteolytic clostridia (e.g. Clostridium perfringens, C. 
bifermentans, C. histolyticum, and C. sporogenes ) are responsible for protein degrAnaerobic Digestionation in 
digesters (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). In Anaerobic Digestiondition to these organisms, numerous other 
species of anaerobic bacteria such as Bacterioides, Butyrivibrio, Fusobacterium, Slelnomonas 
Peptococcus, Campylobacter and Streptococcus are capable for depolymerization of the 
proteins to amino acids and further to simple fatty acids such as acetic, propionic and 
butyric acid as referenced in Archives of Env. Protection,(Palmisano & Barlaz 1996), (Rozej 
et al. 2008). 
Hydrolysis of the lipids is catalyzed by enzymes called esterase and le anaerobic Digestions to saturated and 
unsaturated long chain fatty acids and glycerol. Glycerol is easily assimilated and 
metabolized by the bacteria while the long chain fatty acids undergo an intracellular betaoxydation 
mediated by a variety of enzymes, resulting in short chain fatty acids (e.g. acetic 
and propionic acid) and hydrogen. Anaerobic microorganisms capable to decompose lipids 
usually found in municipal solid waste anaerobic digesters are Anaerovibrio lipotyca and Syntrophomonas 
wolfei (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996). Also, various species of Clostridium and Micrococcus are 
able to degrAnaerobic Digestione lipids to Acetyl- as referenced in Archives of Env. Protection. 
Starch from the food waste is reAnaerobic Digestionily biodegrAnaerobic Digestionable but requires multiple enzymes to 
complete its hydrolysis. Three main types of enzymes that act synergistically are: alphaamylases, 
beta-amylases, gluco-amylases. Some of the microbes found in anaerobic 
digesters capable of degrAnaerobic Digestioning starch are Streptococcus bovis, Bacteriodes amylophilus, 
Selenomonas ruminatium, Succinomonas amylolytica, B. ruminocola, and a number of 
Lactobacillus species (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996).

15



3.2 Acetogenic bacteria/hydrogen-producing acetogens (OHPA) 

Acetogenesis is the stage when the products of the hydrolysis are processed to hydrogen, 
carbon dioxide, formate and acetate. This pathway occurs naturally in well balanced 
methanogenic systems. However, in practice, there are cases of electron or hydrogen 
accumulation (e.g. when methanogenesis is inhibited) when numerous other fermentation 
products may be formed (e. g. propionate, butyrate, lactate, succinate, and alcohols) as a 
mechanism to remove the excess electrons or hydrogen. Organisms that convert these 
fermentation products to acetate, generally exhibit obligate proton- reducing metabolism 
and are obligatory dependent on the hydrogen removal as referenced in Archives of Env. 
Protection. Because of this the acetogenic bacteria are also called obligatory hydrogenproducing 
acetogens (OHPAs). 
Despite the significant importance of synthrophs, the knowledge of their taxonomic 
position, diversity and physiology is insufficient, mainly because of the difficulties in 
isolating them. Several important proton-reducing syntrophic bacteria such as butyrateoxidizers, 
propionate- oxidizers and even acetate-oxidizers have been successfully isolated 
and cultured from methanogenic communities in recent years as referenced in Archives of 
Env. Protection. Thermophilic acetate-oxydizing syntroph, Thermacetogenium phaetum, 
was isolated and characterized by Hattori et al. (2000). The first described syntrophic 
propionate-oxidizing bacterium is Syntrophobacter wolinii, followed by two other 
Syntrophobacter species. Syntrophus aciditrophicus, isolated by Jackson et al. (1999), is a 
universal syntroph oxidizing fatty acids and benzoate. Smithella propionica, which was 
isolated by Liu et al. (1999) is an organism that produces much less acetate from 
propionate than the Syntrophobacter strains, and besides acetate it produces small amount 
of butyrate. Thermophilic propionate- oxidizing bacteria have also been described, and two 
of these have been obtained in pure culture so far: Pelotomaculum thermopropionicum 
strain SI, and Desulfotomaculum thermobenzoicum, subsp. Thermosintrophicum. Finally, 
Sekiguchi et al. (2000) isolated a thermophilic butyrate-oxydizer capable of oxidizing 
saturated fatty acids with four to ten carbon atoms. 


3.3 Methanogenic microorganisms; 

The main route of methane production is through a syntrophic relationship between 
acetate-oxidizing bacteria and hydrogen-utilizing methanogenic Archea. The acetoclastic 
and hydrogenotrophic methanogens contribute 70% and 30%, respectively, to the methane 
production in industrial wastewater treatment. 
Numerous methanogens have been isolated and described so far, but the studies, mainly 
based on 16S rDNA cloning analyses, suggest that the most commonly found methanogens 
genera, in the biogas reactors, are Methanobacterium, Methanothermobacter (formerly 
Methanobacterium), Methanobrevibacter, Methanosarcina, and Methanosaeta (formerly 
Methanotrix) as referenced in Archives of Env. Protection. 

16



Among the acetoclastic methanogenic organisms, Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta 
species has been reported to be dominated in large-scale mesophilic and thermophilic 
digesters treating wastewater and sewage sludge. Its dominance comes mainly due to its 
wide tolerance for environmental factors such as nutrients and temperature (Palmisano & 
Barlaz 1996). 


3.4 Interactions between different microbial consortia in the Anaerobic Digestion reactors 

As mentioned previously the anaerobic methanogenesis is a process that evolves at least 
four different groups of anaerobic microorganisms. Each group contains diverse 
microorganisms responsible for different metabolic tasks. Distinguishing characteristic of 
this anaerobic consortium is that different species of anaerobic microorganisms degrAnaerobic Digestione 
one organic compound interactively, sharing energy and carbon sources from the 
compound (Sekiguchi et al. 2001). 
These organisms have developed specific kind of interdependent relationship called 
syntrophy, special kind of symbiotic cooperation of mutual dependence of the partner 
bacteria with respect to energy limitation where neither partner can exist without the 
other and together they exhibit a metabolic activity that neither one could accomplish on 
its own. In this unique cooperation between two metabolically different types of 
microorganisms they depend on each other for degrAnaerobic Digestionation of a certain substrate for 
energetic reasons (Schink 1997). 
This unique cooperation between the MOs involved in the methanogenesis has evolved due 
to the need to utilize the energy obtained from the electron donor substrate more 
efficiently. The overall reaction anaerobic degrAnaerobic Digestionation is a reaction with very low energy 
yield comparing to the aerobic degrAnaerobic Digestionation. The main reason is that the electron acceptor 
in this case is the carbon dioxide and not oxygen like in the aerobic degrAnaerobic Digestionation. Carbon in 
the carbon dioxide is in the most highly oxidized state with a COD: C ratio of zero. Since the 
energy available depends on the oxidation state of the substrate and indicates the electrons 
available for removal as it is oxidized, with carbon dioxide as electron acceptor the amount 
of free energy available is very low. As shown in the case of the glucose, anaerobic 
degrAnaerobic Digestionation yields around 15 % the energy that would be released through aerobic 
degrAnaerobic Digestionation: 
The syntrophic association between fatty-acid-oxidizing microbes, hydrogen-consuming 
methanogens, and acetate-consuming methanogens represents one syntrophic example in 
the methanogenic community. Fatty acids are converted by syntrophic oxidizers to acetate 
and hydrogen/CO2, and these products are subsequently utilized by the two types of 
methanogens to form methane. Without this food chain, the degrAnaerobic Digestionation of fatty acids 
cannot occur unless coupled with the hydrogen- and acetate-consuming reactions, because 
the first step of the reaction is endergonic (Schink 1997).

17



Reactions that occur are as follows as referenced in the Environmental Microbiology (Ralph 
& Dong 2010): 
- Conversion of propionate to acetate: 
- Conversion of butyrate to acetate: 
Both reactions have unfavorable thermodynamics and unless in syntrophy with the 
hydrogen consuming bacteria and methanogens these organisms cannot exist. In 
particular, hydrogen is the most important intermediate and the hydrogen-scavenging 
reaction makes the whole reaction energetically feasible. The following reactions occur as 
referenced in the Environmental Microbiology (Ralph & Dong 2010): 
- Acetogenic reactions 
- Methanogenic reactions 
From this point of view, hydrogen consuming methanogens make an essential contribution 
not only to the production of methane but also in driving the initial step of oxidation of the 
organic matter to be degrAnaerobic Digestioned by heterotrophic microbes in the reactors. Of the 
intermediates produced during anaerobic degrAnaerobic Digestionation in reactors, butyrate, propionate 
and acetate are the most important in Anaerobic Digestiondition to hydrogen. These substrates (especially 
propionate and butyrate) are also oxidized by the syntrophic association of fatty-acidoxidizers 
and hydrogen-consuming methanogens (Sekiguchi et al. 2001). 
The energy that the MOs obtain from the electron- donor substrate is used for both, cell 
maintenance and cell synthesis. Biomass growth yield depends on the fraction of the 
energy that is available for cell synthesis. In the cases of the methanogens the fraction of 
the energy available for cell synthesis is fs0= 0.05 for acetate methanogens and fs0=0.08 for 
hydrogen utilizing methanogens. This small amount of energy available le anaerobic Digestions to microbial 
growth yield of Y=0.035 gVSS/gBODl and Y= 0.45gVSS/g H2 respectively for the acetate and 
hydrogen utilizing methanogens, and categorize these organisms into slow growing 
organisms. Therefore the methanogenesis is the rate limiting step in the anaerobic 
digestion reaction and requires retention time of at least 15- 20 days for a steAnaerobic Digestiony state 
system as referenced in the Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications. 
Since the methane produced in the Anaerobic Digestion systems is 70% produced from acetate oxidation of 
special interest for the experimental part of this study was its minimum limiting retention 
time, xmin lim,, of 4 d. This allowed us to design the reactor and secure washout of the 
methanogens in order to avoid methane production. On the other side the hydrolysis and 
acidification occur reAnaerobic Digestionily and the concentration of the volatile acids increases from the 
retention time of 3 to 5 days as referenced in the. From here the designed retention time in 
the experimental set up for acidogenesis was decided to be 4 days.

18




 
4. PARAMETERS AFFECTING THE ANAEROBIC DIGESTION OF FOOD WASTE 


4.1. pH value 

The pH value of the reacting material is a pivotal factor in the Anaerobic Digestion of food waste. The 
importance of the pH is due to the fact that methanogenic bacteria are very sensitive to 
acidic conditions and their growth and methane production are inhibited in acidic 
environment. In batch reactors pH value is closer dependent of the retention time and 
loAnaerobic Digestioning rate, as will be described later. 
Different stages of the Anaerobic Digestion process have different optimal pH values. Also the pH value 
changes in response to the biological transformations during different stages of Anaerobic Digestion process. 
Production of organic acids during the acetogenesis can lower the pH below 5 what is lethal 
for methanogens and cause decrease in the methanogens population. Consequently this 
would le anaerobic Digestion to acid accumulation, since the methanogens are responsible for the 
consumption of the formed acids, and digester failure. On the other side excess 
proliferation of methanogens can le anaerobic Digestion to higher concentration of ammonia, increasing the 
pH above 8, what is inhibitory to the acidogenesis (Lusk 1999). 
Constant pH is crucial in the start-up phase because fresh waste has to go first thru the 
stage of hydrolisys and acidogenesis before any methane can be formed, which will lower 
the pH. In order to keep the value of pH on the equilibrium buffer has to be Anaerobic Digestionded into the 
system, such as calcium carbonate or lime. 
Although it has been proven that the optimal range of pH for obtaining maximal biogas 
yield in anaerobic digestion is 6.5–7.5, the range is relatively wide in the plants and the 
optimal value of pH varies with substrate and digestion technique (Liu et al. 2007). The pH 
value is a function of volatile fatty acid (VFA) concentration, bicarbonate concentration, 
and alkalinity of the system as well as the fraction of CO2 in digester gas. In order to fix 
constant pH value it is crucial to Anaerobic Digestionjust the relationship between the VFA and bicarbonate 
concentrations (Liu et al. 2007). 
In 2007 Cun-fang Liu a, Xing-zhong Yuan a, Guang-ming Zeng a, Wen-wei Li and Jing Li b 
developed a mathematical model to describe the relationship between the pH and methane 
production for anaerobic digestion of organic fraction of the municipal solid waste (municipal solid waste) 
in a batch process. The maximum energy recovery of municipal solid waste can be obtained by using 
optimization control of pH. This model includes all three processes occurring in the Anaerobic Digestion 
system and is described as a set of algebraic equations that have been formulated based on 
mass balances for substrates, products and microbial components, and physic-chemical 
equilibrium relationships among ionized/unionized species. 
The expression of relationship between pH and methane yield is: 
where Vmmax is the maximal yield rate of methane (in volume at 0°C and 1 atm pressure) 
per gram of methanogenic bacteria per day (L/g d); Xm- methanogenic biomass (g/L); Km, 

19



saturation constant of methane yield (g/L); Kim, inhibition constant of acetate on methane 
yield (g/L), Ka, the dissociation constant for acetate (1.728 · 10-5) and Ac is ionized acetate  
concentration (g/L) (Liu et al. 2007); 
This model is valid for prediction of the cumulative methane production, and the 
calculation of the optimal value of pH in different conditions. Also, this model can be used
to predict the maximum methane production on the optimal pH value. Therefore a   
maximum generation rate of methane can be obtained and a great efficiency of anaerobic 
digestion can be achieved in the operation of anaerobic digestion of municipal solid waste (Liu et al. 2007).

 
4.2 Composition of the food waste 

The composition of food waste is variable depending on the time of the year, cultural 
habits, region etc. It is important to know the composition of the food waste in order to be 
able to predict both the bio- methanization potential and the most efficient Anaerobic Digestion facility 
design.  
The bio-methanization potential of the waste depends on the concentration of the four
main components: proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and cellulose. This is due to the different 
bio-chemical characteristics of these components (Neves et al. 2007).  
The highest methane yields have systems with excess of lipids but with the longest 
retention time. The methanization is fastest in systems with excess of proteins followed by 
the reactors with excess of cellulose and carbohydrates respectively. However there are 
also inhibitory effects observed in the assays with excess of lipids and excess of proteins 
due to the VFA accumulation and ammonium nitrogen respectively. The lowest rates of the 
hydrolysis are the assays with an excess of lipids and cellulose, indicating that when these 
components are in excess, a slower hydrolysis is induced 


4.3 LoAnaerobic Digestioning rate 

Organic loAnaerobic Digestioning rate is a measure of the biological conversion capacity of the Anaerobic Digestion system. It 
determines the amount of volatile solids feasible as an input in the Anaerobic Digestion system. OverloAnaerobic Digestioning 
of the system can results in low biogas yield. This happens due to accumulation of 
inhibiting substances such as fatty acids in the digester slurry (Vandevivere et al. 1999). 
Figure 4 Effect of the loAnaerobic Digestioning rate above the sustainable 
The events that would occur in the case of overloAnaerobic Digestioning the system are shown in the Figure 
4. It would cause proliferation of the acidogenic bacteria further decreasing the pH in the 
system and disturbing the population of the methanogenic bacteria. Also there is a definite 

20



relationship between the biogas yield and the loAnaerobic Digestioning rate. This is the concept that we used 
in the design of the experimental part of this study. The loAnaerobic Digestioning rate was at the point in 
favor of the acidogenesis avoiding the methane production and maximizing the VFA 
production in it. 
LoAnaerobic Digestioning rate can be calculated using the following equation: 


4.4 Retention time 

Retention time (residence time), in the Anaerobic Digestion reactors, refers to the time that feedstock stays 
in the digester. It can be calculated using the following equation: 
It is determined by the average time needed for decomposition of the organic material, as 
measured by the chemical oxygen demand (COD) and the biological oxygen demand (BOD) 
of the influent and the effluent material. The longer the substrate is kept under proper 
reaction conditions, the more complete its degrAnaerobic Digestionation will be. However, the rate of the 
reaction decreases with longer residence time, indicating that there is an optimal retention 
time that will achieve the benefits of digestion in a cost effective way (Viswanath et al. 
1991). The appropriate time depends on the type of feedstock, environmental conditions 
and intended use of the digested material (Ostrem & Themelis 2004) 
Furthermore retention time in the Anaerobic Digestion system depends on process temperature and total 
solid content. Mesophilic digesters have longer retention time (10-40 days) then 
thermophilic digesters. Also the high solid content systems (“dry” processes) have longer 
retention time then low solid content systems (“wet” processes). Commonly used method 
for shortening the residence time in Anaerobic Digestion reactors is mixing the digester. Usually it is done by 
recirculation of the produced biogas back in the reactor. 
Also the residence time affects the microbial communities in the digester. Different 
microbial communities develop in digesters operating on different retention times. This 
was one of the crucial parameters in the designing the acidogenesis experimental reactor. 
The retention time we used was determined according to the kinetics of the different MOs 
involved as described previously to be 4 days. In our case we wanted to secure washout of 
the methanogens and proliferation of the acidogens what was achieved and will be 
described in details later in this study.

21



4.5 Operating temperature 

Operating temperature is the most important factor determining the performances of the 
Anaerobic Digestion reactors because it is an essential condition for the survival and optimum thriving of the 
microbial consortia. Despite the fact that they can survive a wide range of temperatures,  
bacteria have two optimum ranges of temperature, defined as mesophilic and thermophilic 
temperature optimum. Mesophilic digesters have an operating temperature in the range of 
25- 40 °C and thermophilic digesters have operating temperature in the range of 50- 65°C. 
The rate of Anaerobic Digestion process shown in Figure 5 is measured by gas production rates, bacteria
growth rates, and substrate degrAnaerobic Digestionation. 
According to the reported experimental results as well as the operating performances of 
commercial scale Anaerobic Digestion plants, mesophilic and thermophilic reactors have different 
Anaerobic Digestionvantages and disAnaerobic Digestionvantages. 
Figure 5 Rate of Anaerobic Digestion Process vs. Temperature (Ostrem & Themelis 2004)
Thermophilic digesters allow higher loAnaerobic Digestioning rate and yield higher methane production, 
substrate degrAnaerobic Digestionation and pathogen destruction. Also, the higher temperature shortens the
required retention time because it speeds up the reactions of degrAnaerobic Digestionation of the organic 
material. However, the thermophilic anaerobic bacteria are very sensitive to toxins and 
small environmental changes. Furthermore, these bacteria need more time (over a month)
to develop redox population. These systems are harder to maintain and are less attractive 
for commercial application because they require Anaerobic Digestionditional energy input for self heating.
Mesophilic Anaerobic Digestion reactors operate with robust microbial consortia that tolerate greater 
changes in the environment and are more stable and easier to maintain. Another Anaerobic Digestionvantage 
is that usually these systems do not need any Anaerobic Digestionditional energy input for heating the 
system. On the other hand, the disAnaerobic Digestionvantages of the mesophilic Anaerobic Digestion systems are longer 

22



retention time and lower biogas production. However due to the fact that they are easier to 
operate and maintain, as well as the lower investment cost, they are more attractive for 
commercial scale plants. 


4.6 Classification of the Anaerobic Digestion systems: 

There are many different technologies on the market that are used for Anaerobic Digestion treatment of the 
organic fraction of the municipal solid waste. These systems differ based on the design of the reactor and 
the operating parameters. 
The design of the reactor depends on the feedstock that is going to be processed and varies 
from very simple and easy to maintain Anaerobic Digestion digesters used in rural China and India to very 
complex and automatic systems used lately in the developed world for treatment of the 
organic fraction of the solid waste (of municipal solid waste). The feedstock also determines the need and 
type of pretreatment. In the case of of municipal solid waste the pretreatment is usually big part of the Anaerobic Digestion 
plant and is necessary in order to clean up the feedstock to the required level as well as to 
separate as much as possible recyclable materials. 
The design of the digester also depends on the amount of the available feedstock that 
determines the capacity of the reactor. The bigger systems have been proven to be reliable 
and economic, so the trend is to build bigger plants as will be shown later in this study 
(Ostrem & Themelis 2004). 
Characterization of the Anaerobic Digestion systems based on the operating parameters is done by the 
following criteria: 
1. LoAnaerobic Digestioning rate in total solids content: 
- Low-solids content (<15%Total Solids) sometimes also called “wet digestion”; 
- High-solids content (25-30 % TS) also known as “dry digestion”. 
When the feedstock used is the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste both systems apply and 
have been proven successful. In both cases water needs to be Anaerobic Digestionded in order to 
lower the content of total solids. The “dry digestion” requires smaller and therefore 
less costly digesters on one side but more costly Anaerobic Digestionditional equipment for mixing 
and material flow on the other side (Ostrem & Themelis 2004)”. 
2. Operating temperature: 
- Thermophilic Anaerobic Digestion processes operate in the temperature range of 50°C-65°C ; 
- Mesophilic Anaerobic Digestion processes operate at about 37°C. 
Anaerobic digestion of the of municipal solid waste is possible in both temperature ranges. 
Thermophilic Anaerobic Digestion digesters have been shown to be more efficient in biogas 
production, faster rate of decomposition but with higher maintenance costs. 
3. Number of reactors used in series: 

23


 
- Single stage digester: All reactions take place in one reactor and environmental 
conditions are maintained at levels that suit all types of bacteria. Therefore, 
operating conditions for a particular stage are not optimal. 
- Multi-stage digesters have physically separated biochemical reactions of hydrolysis 
and acidogenesis in different reactor vessels. Each vessel maintains the optimal 
environmental conditions for the microorganisms that facilitate the specific reaction 
that is happening inside. Therefore these systems can be more efficient. 
Both types of Anaerobic Digestion systems are used in processing the of municipal solid waste and further in this 
study specific cases will be described. 
4. Method of introducing the feed into the reactor: 
- Continuous flow reactors have feed and discharge flows in continuous or semicontinuous 
manner. This is the most common form of industrial scale reactors. 
- Batch reactors are loAnaerobic Digestioned and allowed to react for a certain period (usually two 
weeks). 
Digestion of the of municipal solid waste is possible in both types of systems although there are 
Anaerobic Digestionvantages and disAnaerobic Digestionvantages in both cases. For example the batch reactors need to 
be bigger in volume due to the long retention time while in the case of the 
continuous flow reactor the effluent is a mixture of partly and completely digested 
material (Ostrem & Themelis 2004).




 
5 FEEDSTOCK MATERIALS USED IN ANAEROBIC DIGESTION 

The most suitable feedstock for Anaerobic Digestion is: 
- Animal waste and biowaste from wastewater treatment plants 
- Food and kitchen waste from restaurants, canteens, food markets, and municipal 
source- separated food waste. 
- Organic waste from food processing industry, slaughter houses, etc. 
As in the case of aerobic composting, there have been attempts to physically separate the 
organic fraction from the mixed municipal solid waste stream and subject it to Anaerobic Digestion (DiStefano & Belenky, 
2009). However, experience with such operations around the world has, generally, not 
been satisfactory. E.g., the compost product of a $60 million modern recycling plant near 
Athens that processes mixed municipal solid waste has proven to be unsuitable as soil conditioner because 
of impurities, such as small pieces of plastics and metals. As a result, six years after start up, 
most of the compost product is landfilled. Although most of the Anaerobic Digestion plants are now 
operating with source separated organics (source separated organics) they are still facing problems due to the 
impurities in the feedstock. This is the case in the visited plants in Toronto and Barcelona 
as will be described later in this study. 


5.1 Food waste in US and its characteristics 

24



Food waste includes leftovers from residential food preparation and consumption as well 
as from commercial (or industrial) sources such as deli markets, restaurants etc. According 
to U.S. EPA estimates, food waste comprise about 12.4% of the U.S. municipal solid waste in 2006 (Figure 
6); this would correspond to over 40 million tons, according the 2006 State of Garbage 
survey of BioCycle and Columbia University (Arsova et al. 2008). EPA has estimated that 
less than a million tons are co-composted aerobically with yard waste (EPA 2007). 
Figure 6 Total municipal solid waste generation (by Material). 2006 EPA 
The composition of the organic fraction of municipal solid waste depends on various 
factors, including climate, collection frequency, season and cultural practices. 
The biodegrAnaerobic Digestionable fraction of municipal solid waste contains anywhere from 15%-70% water (Miller & N. 
L. Clesceri 2003). Food waste is characterized by high percentages of moisture (> 70%) and 
Volatile Solids (> 95%) and has a very high biodegrAnaerobic Digestionability.




 
6 APPLICATION OF THE ANAEROBIC DIGESTION AROUND THE WORLD 

Over the centuries, Anaerobic Digestion has been applied in several ways in different parts of the world. In 
China and India, it has been extensively used to recover energy from farm waste, such as 
manure. Most of these facilities are farm or village-scale and the biogas is used for heating, 
cooking and lighting. In North America, Anaerobic Digestion is used both on large farms for manure 
treatment and at wastewater treatment plants (Palmisano & Barlaz 1996) (Ostrem & 
Themelis 2004). European nations have gone further in the application of this technology 

25




 
by establishing commercial plants for the treatment of source separated organics from the 
municipal solid waste. Recently application of the Anaerobic Digestion as sustainable solution for treatment 
of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste has been recognized worldwide and the 
number of this kind of plants has increased dramatically over the last decAnaerobic Digestione (IEA 2008). 


6.1 Current application of Anaerobic Digestion technology on an industrial scale 

Currently there are nearly 240 Anaerobic Digestion facilities around the world operating of capacity over 
2,500 metric tons of organic waste per year. The total installed capacity of these plants is 
over 11 million metric tons per year (IEA 2008). This plants process not only the organic 
fraction of the municipal solid waste but also organic waste from the food industries and 
animal manure. 
As shown in Figure 7, the installed Anaerobic Digestion capacity has increased substantially since 1995. The 
total Anaerobic Digestion capacity has increased five-fold worldwide, from about 2 million metric tons in 
1995 to over 11 million by 2008 (IEA 2008). 
Figure 7 Increase of installed global Anaerobic Digestion capacity 
Europe le Anaerobic Digestions in number of Anaerobic Digestion plants and total installed capacity. Most of the Anaerobic Digestion plants were 
built there principally due to the EU Landfill Directive 1999/31/EC that requires from the 
member states to reduce the amount of landfilled organics for 65% relative to the 1995 amount 
by 2016. There are more than 120 plants processing the organic fraction of municipal solid waste in Europe, with 
total operating capacity of about 4.6 million tons per year (IEA 2008). The number and total 
capacity of Anaerobic Digestion plants treating organic municipal solid waste (municipal solid waste) in Europe are shown in the 

26



Table 1. 
Table 1 European countries with facilities processing municipal solid waste in anaerobic digesters in 2006 
(Levis et al. 2010) 
Country Number of plants Country capacity (t/y) 
Germany 55 1,250,000 
Spain 23 1,800,000 
Switzerland 13 130,000 
France 6 400,000 
Netherlands 5 300,000 
Belgium 5 200,000 
Italy 5 160,000 
Austria 4 70,000 
Sweden 3 35,000 
Portugal 3 100,000 
United Kingdom 2 100,000 
Denmark 2 40,000 
Poland 1 20,000 
Total 127 4,605,000 

27



The size of individual Anaerobic Digestion plants has also increased over the years, as shown in Figure 8. 
While in 1985 the biggest plant hAnaerobic Digestion capacity of 25,000 tons/year, the biggest plant built 
lately has 500,000 tons/year of capacity. Regarding operating conditions, the development 
of Anaerobic Digestion technologies has evolved with time from low-solids content (“wet”) to high-solids 
(“dry”) and from mesophilic to thermophilic. By 1995, high-solids content processes 
accounted for 9% of the number of plants and 20% of the operating capacity. High-solids 
content plants built since 1995 account for 30% of the operating capacity. High-solid 
processes are usually thermophilic. This entails shorter retention time and lower reactor 
costs, higher biogas yield, and higher operating costs. Nevertheless, currently mesophilic, 
low-solids Anaerobic Digestion plants are the most common.
Figure 8 Trend of new Anaerobic Digestion plants installed each year, from 1995 to 2008 (IEA 2008)

 
6.2 Most commonly used Anaerobic Digestion technologies worldwide 

The principal technologies used around the world are Kompogas, Valorga, RosRoca, BTA, 
Dranco, Cites and Linde (IEA 2008). The total installed capacity worldwide today of each of 
these technologies is shown in Table 2. 
Table 2 Installed capacity of the principal Anaerobic Digestion technologies 

28



Most of the feedstock to these plants is provided by municipalities that offer sourceseparated 
collection of the organic fraction. The retention time, biogas production rate and 
total annual biogas production of various Anaerobic Digestion processes are shown in Table 3 (Ostrem & 
Themelis 2004). 
Table 3 Operating conditions, biogas production rate and total capacity of the most 
common used Anaerobic Digestion processes 
Based on this analysis, the Valorga technology appears to be the most successful, on the 
basis of installed capacity and biogas production per ton. The average biogas production is 
at 113 Nm3/t of feed material. 
A study was mAnaerobic Digestione using the Multi-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDA) method, based on the 
following criteria: (a) GHG emissions, (b) energy recovery, (c) material recovered and (d) 
operating costs. This study showed the Valorga technology to be 2nd best, right after Dranco 
technology (Karagiannidis et al. 2008). The Dranco technology was found to combine the 

29



Anaerobic Digestionvantages of low-cost and high energy recovery. However, Dranco is a thermophilic 
process and therefore not as attractive as Valorga; there has been only one new plant since 
2000. Also, the Valorga technology offers both mesophilic and thermophilic operation 


6.3 Brief description of principal Anaerobic Digestion processes 

6.3.1 Kompogas 

This technology was started in Switzerland at the end of the 1980’s. The first plant started 
the trial phase in 1991 in Rumlang, Switzerland. There are 26 operating plants now, with 
total installed capacity of 533,500 tons (Table 2). Most of these plants process source 
separated organics. Kompogas is a thermophilic process operating at 23-28% total solids 
without gas recirculation. The reactor is a horizontal cylinder and the slurry moves in plugflow 
with retention time of 15-20 days. There is a slowly rotating intermittent propeller in 
the digester to push the organic material, homogenize and degasify the pulp and to keep 
the heavy particles in the suspension. Due to the mechanical requirements of the system, 
the size of the reactor is limited and the need for bigger capacity is satisfied by installing a 
number of reactors in parallel. This modular design reduces capital construction costs as 
well as allowing for a wide range of facility sizes, from 5,000 to 100,000 tons per year 
(Ostrem & Themelis 2004). 
Prior to the Anaerobic Digestion, the feedstock is treated mechanically for separation of the inorganic 
contaminants and size-reduction. In between the mechanical treatment and the Anaerobic Digestion reactor 
organic material is stored in a buffer tank to secure continuous feeding of the reactor. Also 
in this tank thickening occurs in order to reach final concentration of 23- 28% of TS in the 
Anaerobic Digestion system. On its way from the buffer tank to the methanizer the organic material flows 
through the heat exchanger for preheating of the substrate. The digesting chamber is fully 
enclosed and heated to eliminate the undesirable germs and weed seeds (Hyder Consulting 
2005). The fermented material is dewatered for separation of the solid material from the 
liquid for further process in the composting units. 
The schematic diagram of a Kompogas Anaerobic Digestion facility is shown in Figure 9. 

30



Figure 9 Schematic diagram of Kompogas Anaerobic Digestion facility 

6.3.2 Valorga 

This process was developed in France in 1981 and was initially designed to treat organic 
fraction of municipal solid waste and later Anaerobic Digestionapted to treating mixed municipal solid waste (Shefali & Themelis 2002), (de 
Laclos et al. 1997). The very first pilot plant was installed 1982 in Montpellier, France. First 
industrial scale plant, of 50.000 t/y, was opened August 1988 in Amiens, France, as the 
very first Anaerobic Digestion plant for treatment of the municipal solid waste with the high content of total solids in the 
world. 
Prior to the Anaerobic Digestion reactor the substrate passes through pretreatment consisted of automatic 
separation of non biodegrAnaerobic Digestionable contaminants such as plastic bags, glass from the desired 
organic material. After the pretreatment the waste is mixed into a thick sludge with 
concentration of 25- 32 % of TS and introduced in the Anaerobic Digestion reactor from the bottom. 
The Valorga reactor is a vertical, plug-flow cylinder separated into two compartments by a 
vertical partition. This wall extends 2/3 of the diameter and in full height of the reactor. 
The design of the reactor ensures that the material moves up and around the partition. 
Biogas is re-circulated through the bottom of the reactor to provide mixing and suspension 
of the solids as the slurry moves through the reactor (de Laclos et al. 1997). 
Typically, the Valorga process is operated at high solids concentration (25-32%), and can 
be operated on both mesophilic and thermophilic operating temperature. 

31


 
The digested material is dewatered and the solid cake is treated aerobically to completely 
stabilized compost. The biogas produced on these plants is used for production of heat, 
electricity or is purified to a quality of natural gas and sold like a fuel. 
Figure 10 Valorga Anaerobic Digestion reactor 

6.3.3 Biotechnische Abfallverwertung GmbH (BTA) process 

This process was developed in the 1980s in Germany, as multistage low-solids system for 
treating mixed municipal solid waste or source separated organic waste (food and garden waste) on 
mesophilic temperatures. BTA includes waste pre-treatment and separation stages in fully 
enclosed and highly automated facilities, whose capacity ranges from 2,000 to 150,000 
tons/year (Shefali & Themelis 2002) 
A research and development facility is located in BAnaerobic Digestionen, Germany but BTA is available 
around the globe through official licensed companies like CanAnaerobic Digestiona Composting Inc. for 
CanAnaerobic Digestiona and USA. 
This technology is available in both, single stage plant design as well as two stages process. 
The unique patented part of this technology is the wet mechanical pretreatment of the 
waste consisted of the hydropulper and hydrocyclon. 
The hydropulper is a unit where by means of buoyancy and shear forces the floating as well 
as the heavy non- biodegrAnaerobic Digestionable materials is separated from the organic fraction. Organics 
leave the hydropulper in a form of suspension that is easier for degrAnaerobic Digestionation later. Second 
unique step of the BTA pretreatment is the hydrocyclon, or grit-removal system, part 
following the hydropulper. Here the small pieces of heavy material and glass as well as 
sand are removed. 

32



Figure 11 BTA anaerobic digestion process scheme 

6.3.4 Dranco 

The Dry Anaerobic Composting (DRANCO) process was developed in 1983 in Belgium and 
commercialized by the company Organic Waste Systems in 1988. This is a single-stage 
thermophilic process (50–58°C), with high-solid content, and without biogas recirculation. 
Operating plants have capacities in the range of 10,000–120,000 metric tons/yr. (Shefali & 
Themelis 2002). This is a process for treatment of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste (IEA 
2008) 

33 



Figure 12 Dranco anaerobic digester 
The feed is introduced continuously through the top of the reactor and digested material is 
continuously removed from the bottom. There is no mixing in the reactor apart from the 
downward plug flow of the waste due to gravity. The digested material is first de-watered 
in a screw press and the filter cake is cured for two weeks to final compost product. The 
filtrate obtained from de-watering is re-circulated in the system and used to Anaerobic Digestionjust the 
solids concentration of incoming waste. The retention time of this technology is usually 20 
days.




 
7 CASE STUDIES OF ANAEROBIC DIGESTION PLANTS IN NORTH AMERICA AND EUROPE 

In this section the findings from the visits of the anaerobic digestion plants in North 
America and Barcelona, Spain, are presented. All the data were collected during the site 
visits of these plants conducted by the author (Arsova 2009b) (Arsova 2009c) (Arsova 
2009d). The CanAnaerobic Digestionian plants are the only industrial scale Anaerobic Digestion facilities in North America 
processing organic fraction of the municipal solid waste. The Barcelona plants were selected as a good 
example of how Anaerobic Digestion plants can be successfully integrated in an Anaerobic Digestionvanced integrated waste 
management system. Furthermore, there are three Anaerobic Digestion plants serving for the metropolitan 
area of Barcelona and one of them is the largest Anaerobic Digestion facility in Europe.

34


 
7.1 Anaerobic digestion of source-separated organic waste in North America 

Despite the wide application of Anaerobic Digestion in waste water treatment, agriculture, and industry, 
there are only three industrial size Anaerobic Digestion facilities operating in North America and treating 
the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste. One plant is located in the U.S. and two are in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. 

7.1.1 Anaerobic Digestion in the US: East Bay Municipal Utility District- Oakland, California 

The East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) is principally a wastewater treatment 
facility in Oakland, CA. They process source separated food waste from a food waste 
processing facility in San Francisco together with the biosolids from the waste water 
treatment. After some Anaerobic Digestionditional grinding to form slurry, they Anaerobic Digestiond it to their anaerobic 
sludge digesters. EBMUD has excess capacity in their digesters due to the closing of some 
industries that were supplying material for anaerobic treatment. The process of codigestion 
of the source separated organics and the biosolids is performed in two mesophilic and two thermophilic 
reactors without any noticeable difference in their performances. Due to the location in an 
industrial zone, the fact that this is a large WWTP and the manner in which the source separated organics is 
received, no specific odor control is necessary (Barlaz et al. 2008) 
In 2008, they processed 90 metric tons/day of food waste five days a week, i.e. about 
22,000 tons/yr (Neves et al. 2007). The amount of electricity produced is enough to cover 
only 90% of the onsite electricity usage. This is due the restriction to operate only two of 
their three 2MW generators at a time in compliance with the air quality regulations. The 
excess amount of the biogas is flared and the solid residuals are used as landfill daily cover 
(Barlaz et al. 2008). 

7.1.2 Anaerobic digestion of source separated organic waste in CanAnaerobic Digestiona 

Both Anaerobic Digestion plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona are located in Ontario and serve the city of Toronto and the 
surrounding communities. Both of them have BTA patented technology installed. The plant 
in Dufferin has the single-stage BTA configuration while the plant in Newmarket uses the 
two-stage process configuration (Arsova 2009b) (Arsova 2009c). Main feedstock for both 
plants is the Source-Separated Organic fraction (source separated organics) from the Toronto’s residential Green 
Bin and the commercial Yellow bag collection program. The city of Toronto now collects 
over 110,000 metric tons of food waste and has plans for expanding the program to include 
“multi-family” dwellings (apartment buildings, etc.) (Arsova 2009b). 

Dufferin Organic Processing Facility, Toronto, Ontario 
The Dufferin Organic Processing Facility (DOPF) started operations in 2002 and was 
designed as a demonstration plant with nominal capacity of 25,000 tons/year. It utilizes 
patented BTA process that includes wet pretreatment and single-stage low-solids, 
mesophilic anaerobic digester. A trommel screen and material recovery system were 
installed prior to the BTA anaerobic digestion to open plastic bags and sort out the 
contaminants. 

35


 
Figure 13 Anaerobic digester on the Dufferin Anaerobic Digestion plant 
Currently this system is not used because there is only a small amount of non-organic 
material in the source separated organics (Arsova 2009b). 
Figure 14 Commercial Yellow Bag collection program in the city of Toronto (photo by L. 
Arsova) 

36



The hydro-mechanical (wet) pretreatment system is comprcomprised of a hydropulper followed 
by a hydrocyclone. This is a batch process with a dual objective, to separate contaminants 
from the organic waste and to transform the source separated organics into organic pulp. Contaminants are 
separated in two stages: first the floating materials (textile, plastic, foils etc), and the heavy
fraction (bones, glass, stones, coins, etc), Figure 17, are removed in the hydro-pulper; 
second, the grit fraction (small pieces of heavy material such as glass are removed in the 
hydro-cyclone, Figure 16. 
Figure 15 Flow sheet of Dufferin Organics Processing Facility flow chart
Typically, contaminants comprise 23%, by weight, of the proceed source separated organics, (<20% light fraction, 
1.5% heavy fraction, 1.5% grit fraction). Pulped organics with a solids content of 8-9% are 
fed into a digester with a liquid capacity of 3,600 m3 and designed retention time of 17-24 
days. It should be noted that current retention time is 7 days because the City of Toronto 
needs to process more source separated organics due to an increase of the source separated organics collection. This results in a higher 
concentration of volatile fatty acids in the residue and lower specific gas production. The 
sludge coming out of the digester is filtered to separate the solids cake from the liquid 
fraction. About 0.33 tons of digested solids are produced per ton of source separated organics feedstock to the 
plant and further processed to final compost. On the average, 30-60 tons per day of this 
material are transported to off-site aerobic composting facilities. The liquid fraction is 
recirculated into the hydro-pulper. 

37


 
Figure 16 Grit fraction at Dufferin Anaerobic Digestion plant (photo by L. Arsova) 
As noted earlier, the nominal capacity of this plant was 25,000 metric tons of source separated organics/year. 
Since May 2008, after some changes in the equipment and operating procedures, the plant 
is now operating at about 190% of the nominal capacity, i.e. 42,500 tons/year. On average, 
185-200 tons/day are processed in summer and 135 tons/day in winter (Arsova 2009b). 
Current biogas production is 100-120 m3/metric ton of source separated organics (residence time of 20-23 days). 
Since this plant was primary designed as a demonstration plant, it does not have an energy 
conversion system and all biogas is combusted in an open flare. It has been estimated that 
if the DOPF were to use the biogas to run a gas engine, out of 35,000 metric tons of source separated organics 
processed in 2007, it would have generated 4,500 MWh of electricity, i.e. about 130 kWh 
per ton of source separated organics processed (Arsova 2009b). This amount corresponds to about one fourth of 
the electricity generated per ton of municipal solid waste combusted in U.S. waste treatment  facilities (550 kWh/ ton 
municipal solid waste). 

38


 
Figure 17 Floating and heavy fractions separated at Dufferin Anaerobic Digestion facility (photo by L. Arsova) 
Newmarket Organic Processing Facility, Newmarket, Ontario 
The Newmarket anaerobic digestion plant was built in July 2000 by CanAnaerobic Digestiona Composting 
Inc. and has been operated by Halton Recycling LTD. since 2003 (Arsova 2009c). The 
original design of this facility was for a two-stage Anaerobic Digestion process, with 
separate tanks for hydrolysis and methanogenesis. Due to financial difficulties the 
hydrolysis tank was not built and the facility is now operating as a single stage Anaerobic Digestion plant 
with methanizer tank designed for two stages Anaerobic Digestion process (Arsova 2009a). 

39



Figure 18 Anaerobic digester and aerobic VCU at the Newmarket plant 
The incoming feedstock is pretreated in two phases, mechanically and hydro-mechanically. 
Mechanical separation removes large contaminants and recyclables. It consists of a bag 
breaker, trommel screen for separation of medium and large size materials, and magnetic 
and eddy current separators, for separation of ferrous metals and aluminum cans. The 
hydro-mechanical treatment comprises three hydropulpers in parallel, followed by a 
hydrocyclon. The floating, heavy, and grid fraction of contaminants are removed here, as at 
the Dufferin facility. The feedstock is of lower quality than at Dufferin and the amount of 
non-compostable residue that goes to the landfill is 25-30% of the feedstock. 
The organic pulp leaving the hydropulper is stored in a pulp buffer tank to ensure 
continuous feeding of the Anaerobic Digestion reactor. From the buffer tank and on its way to the digester, 
the pulp passes through screw presses, for separation of the solids from the liquid, and 
then through a 50 micron filter. Thus, significant fraction of the organics is separated at the 
screw press and is then treated aerobically in the composting units described later. This is 
a design problem of this facility, because the Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) 
reactor installed as a methanizer is suitable only for solubilized organic material. Because 
of these limitations of the reactor and without the hydrolysis tank significant part of the 
organics are “lost” on the screw presses that affect the biogas production. The retention 
time in the digester now is 15 days. 

40



Figure 19 Flowsheet of the Newmarket Anaerobic Digestion facility 
The filter cake separated at the screw press is subjected to composting for 13 days. The 
composting process starts in the Vertical Composting Units (VCU), in-vessel aerobic 
composting units where temperatures are sufficient to kill pathogens. After seven days in 
the VCU, the final compost product is cured in the maturing tanks. The amount of compost 
produced is 0.29 t per ton of the processed feedstock (Arsova 2009c) 
The average specific biogas production is 105 m3/ton of processed feedstock with an 
average methane content of 60% and is used for production of electricity (Arsova 2009c). 
The Nemarket facility has designed capacity of 150,000 tons of organic waste per year. Due 
to odor emission problems, under court order, the facility processed only 17,000 tons of 
source separated organics in 2008 (Arsova 2009c). 

41


 
Figure 20 Biofilter on the Newmarket facility installed as part of the Remediation Plan in 2007 (photo by L. Arsova) 
In 2006, Halton Recycling put into effect a Remediation Plan to meet environmental 
requirements and reduce the odor emissions. This plan included installation of two 
biofilters, three wet scrubbers and eight activated carbon filter units during 2007. 
Anaerobic Digestionditional retrofitting of the basic BTA equipment took place in 2008. Communications of 
the author with the management of this facility have indicated that technical problems with 
the odor emissions have been solved and it is planned to increase the operating capacity to 
70,000 tons of source separated organics by 2013 (Arsova 2009c). 


7.2 Anaerobic digestion as part of the integrated waste management in the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona, Spain 

Integrated waste management in the metropolitan area of Barcelona is a great example of 
successful integration of the anaerobic digestion into the general solid waste management 
plan. During the study visit all the data was collected from the officials of the 
Environmental Authority of the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona and the management of the 
visited plants. There are three Anaerobic Digestion plants serving the metropolitan area of Barcelona and 
the Anaerobic Digestion plant in the Ekopark II is the biggest facility of its kind in Europe. These plants are 
processing the source separated fraction of the municipal solid waste and have three different technologies 
installed, Valorga, RosRoca and BTA. 

7.2.1 Integrated waste management system in the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona, Spain. 

The Environmental Authority of the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona (EMMA from the title 
in Spanish) is a local government body serving 33 municipalities in the Metropolitan Area 
of Barcelona covering geographic area of 583 km². It provides services to a population of 
3.12 million people. It is responsible for waste water and solid waste management. In 

42



2007, 1.66 million tons of municipal solid waste were generated that is 1.46 kg/day or 0.54 metric tons per 
capita. The municipal solid waste in the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona is collected in five 
separate fractions as follows: glass, paper and cardboard, light packaging (plastic and 
metal), source separated organics (source separated organics) and “all other”. Out of the total amount of collected 
municipal solid waste 154,103 tons are source separated organics that is 0.05 tons per capita. 
Figure 21 Entity of the Environment of the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona and locations of the Ecoparks and the Waste-to-energy facilities 
Source separated fractions of paper and cardboard, glass and light packaging go either 
directly to private recycling companies or, in the case of the light packaging fraction, first to 
material recovery facility for separation and then to private recycling companies. The source separated organics 
fraction is processed exclusively in the Anaerobic Digestion plants at the Ekoparks while the “all other” 
fraction is processed either in the aerobic composting facilities at the Ekoparks or in the 
Waste- to- Energy plant. 

7.2.2 Ecoparks 

Ecoparks are specially constructed sites for treatment of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste. 
Usually these sites have both, anaerobic digestion and aerobic composting facilities, 
installed. The two fractions treated on these sites are: 

43



- Source Separated Organics comprised of food waste, paper napkins, used kitchen 
paper as well as green waste. 
- “All other” fraction is the waste that remains after the recyclable and compostable 
materials are separated at the source by the citizens. This fraction may contain 
between 30- 40% of organic matter. 
Reported numbers in 2007 clearly show an increase in the amount of separately collected 
organic fraction and decrease in the amount of the “all other” fraction (Figure 22Figure 23). 
Figure 22 Evolution of the amount of separately collected organic fraction of the municipal solid waste (source EMMA) 

44



Figure 23 Evolution of the amount of the collected “all other” fraction of the municipal solid waste (source EMMA) 
Currently, the metropolitan area of Barcelona has three operating Ecoparks and one under 
construction expected to start operating during 2010: 
1. The Ecopark 1- Barcelona; 
2. The Ecopark 2- MontcAnaerobic Digestiona i Reixac; 
3. The Ecopark 3- Sant Anaerobic Digestionria de Besos (Ecoparc del Mediterrani) 
4. The Ecopark 4 Hostalets - Pierola (under construction) 
All Ecoparks are owned by the Environmental Entity (EMMA), but operated by the 
companies that built them and have the concession rights over the plants for 15 years. 
Ecopark 1 is under management of the UTE Ecoparc, Ekopark 2 is managed by the 
company Ebeso and the Ecopark 3, is under concession of CESPA the company. 
In the table bellow summary of the Ecoparks performance and characteristics are given. 
Further in this thesis detailed descriptions and explanations are given for each Anaerobic Digestion plant in 
the Metropolitan Area of Balcelona. 
Table 4 Summary of the carachteristics of the Anaerobic Digestion plants of the Ecoparks in the Metropolitan area of Barcelona 

45



Ecopark 1- Barcelona 
The Ecopark 1- Barcelona treats source separated organics and the “all other” fraction from the city of Barcelona 
and the following municipalities: Hospitalet de Llobregat, El Prat de Llobregat and 
VilAnaerobic Digestionecans. 
The plant, which entered into operation in 2001, was the first facility for treatment of 
municipal waste in the metropolitan area and is currently being remodeled. 
The original plant hAnaerobic Digestion the Linden Anaerobic Digestion technology installed consisted of dry mechanical pretreatment 
with sieving drum (>120mm), wet-mechanical pre-treatment of suspensors and 
sieving drum, and low solid content anaerobic digestion. From the very beginning this 
technology was not providing sufficient cleaning of the feedstock what resulted in 
problems in the Anaerobic Digestion process. 
The reported main problems of the original design were: 
- Insufficient elimination of contaminants 
- Constantly clogged pipes 
- Floating layers and massive sediments in the digester 
- Inefficient mixing of the material in the digester 
- High loss of organics in the separation resulting in low biogas yield 
- Unacceptable quality of the separated residues 
- Big amount of rejected waste for landfilling 
According to Mr. Trullols, director of the department for solid waste management of the 
Environmental Authority of the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona, one of the reactors on this 
facility exploded in 2006. Explosion was caused by a pressure build up under very thick 
and solidified layer of the material in the reactor. This layer was built of the contaminants 
that ended up in the reactor due to the bAnaerobic Digestion quality of the feedstock and the inefficient 
separation of contaminants. At that time the “all other” fraction was treated in all Anaerobic Digestion 
digesters on the site. 
Because of the problems, the operator of this plant, UTE Ecoparc, decided to remove the 
existing pre-treatment and also to refurbish the digester itself. Thus, BTA via its licensee 
BIOTEC was assigned to integrate a complete new BTA® Hydromechanical Pre-treatment, 
re-engineer one 6,000 m3 digester and equip it with the BTA® Gas Mixing System. Also, the 
BTA® Process Control System was installed. The BTA® Hydromechanical Pre-treatment 
consists of 3 x 32 m3 BTA® Waste Pulpers (hydropulpers), corresponding light fraction 
presses and four BTA® Grit Removal Systems (hydrocyclones). Ecopark 1 has a total 
installed capacity of 85,000 t/y of source separated organics, in Anaerobic Digestion and 160,000 t/y of “all other” 

46



fraction in aerobic composting tunnels, i.e. a total capacity of 245,000 tons of waste per 
year. 
Figure 24 The author in front of Ecopark 1 
Pretreatment: 
The pretreatment and the treatment of source separated organics and the “all other” fractions, entering the 
facility, are performed in two separate processing lines. 
The pre-treatment of the source separated organics is very complex and consists of a series of process units: 
1. Tromell with 400 mm sieve 
2. Double trommel with 150 mm in the first part and 60 mm sieve in the second part. 
3. Magnetic separation of the ferrous metals 
4. Flocculate separation for Al 
5. Ballistic separation, 
6. Optic separator of plastics 
7. Aspiration of plastic film 
8. Manual separation 
The pre-treatment of the “all other” fraction is simpler because the aerobic composting 
does not require high purity of the feedstock as the Anaerobic Digestion and comrises: 
1. Trommel for separation of the voluminous matters with blAnaerobic Digestiones inside 
2. Trommel of 45 mm for separation of the organics that go directly to the compost tunnels 
3. Ballistic separation 
4. Magnetic separator 
5. Flocculate separation for Al 
6. Aspiration of plastic film 
7. Manual separation 

47



This pretreatment separates the recyclables such as: paper, packaging materials (tetra 
pack), and different types of plastics (PET, PEAnaerobic Digestion and PE). 
Anaerobic digestion: 
Figure 25 Material and energy flows at the Ecopark 1 Anaerobic Digestion plant 
After the mechanical pretreatment and separation of the contaminants from the source separated organics, the 
organic material goes to three hydropulpers in parallel, followed by four hydrocyclones, as 
unique part of the BTA Anaerobic Digestion technology. After this, the material is collected and stored in one 
buffer tank to be used for continual feeding of the four methanizing tanks (each of 6000 
m3) with fresh organics. Retention time in the methanizers is 15 days. Produced biogas is 
collected and after desulfurization is burned in five co-generation engines, each with 
capacity of 1MW. 
The sludge coming out of the digester is centrifuged to separate the liquid and solid 
fractions. The solids are then treated aerobically in 38 composting tunnels and the filtrate 
solution is re-circulated back to the system and mixed with incoming fresh waste material. 
Odor control and waste water treatment: 
The whole facility is under negative pressure and the odorous air is treated through 4 
biofilters, 2 organic and 2 inorganic. During the visit the odor at the plant was unbearable 
and detailed tour of the facility was impossible. According to the management of the 
facility, at that point they were experiencing problems with one of the biofilters what 
required short shut down of the odor control system for maintenance. 
Also they have waste water treatment facility where the waste water is treated prior to 
relieving it in the public sewage system. 
The author was not allowed to take pictures but the equipment was very similar to that 
used at the Dufferin, Ontario facility in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. 

48


 
Ecopark 2- MontcAnaerobic Digestiona i Reixac 
The Ecopark 2- MontcAnaerobic Digestiona i Reixac is located in the Industrial zone of the town of Can 
Salvatella Andis, 9.5 miles away from the center of the city of Barcelona. It serves all 
municipalities comprising the metropolitan Area of Barcelona except for the City of 
Barcelona. Although it is a metropolitan facility, it also serves few municipalities out of the 
metropolitan area of Barcelona. 
This plant started operating in 2003 and has both, anaerobic digestion and aerobic 
composting facilities, installed on the site and processes the source separated organics and “all other” fractions as 
well as green waste from pruning and cleaning of municipal parks and gardens. Anaerobic 
digestion technology installed is Valorga and the aerobic treatment is tunnel composting. 
From the opening until 2006 both, source separated organics and “all other”, fractions were processed in the Anaerobic Digestion 
reactors when problems occurred in the reactors treating “all other” fraction. During 
routine service of the reactor damage on the inner separation wall were discovered. Since 
then only the source separated organics fraction is processed in the anaerobic digestion reactors and the “all 
other” fraction is processed only in the aerobic composting. Total installed capacity on this 
plant is 240.000 t/year of organic waste. Out of this amount 120.000 t/ year is the capacity 
in the anaerobic digestion reactors. The treatment of both fractions starts with mechanical 
pretreatment for recovering of the recyclables (glass, paper, packaging, etc) followed by 
anaerobic digestion and aerobic composting of the source separated organics and only aerobic composting of the 
“all other” fraction. The green waste is mixed with the digested material from the anaerobic 
digestion prior to its introducing to the aerobic composting tunnels. 
Figure 26 Ecopark 2 
Pretreatment 
The pretreatment prepare the “all other” fraction for aerobic composting and the source separated organics 
fraction for anaerobic digestion, separating the recyclables and the refuse materials. 

49



Pretreatment of the two fractions is performed in two separated lines. The pretreatment of 
the source separated organics fraction is a single separation line with capacity of 30 t/ h. The separation of the 
recyclables and the impurities from the “all other” fraction is performed on two lines, each 
with capacity of 45 t/h. Pretreatment of the source separated organics starts in a sorting cabin with manual 
separation of the voluminous recyclables such as cardboard, plastics and glass. After the 
sorting cabin the material goes through the following pretreatment units: 
- Bag breaker 
- Trommel with sieve size of 80 mm 
- Electromagnetic separator of the ferrous materials 
Mechanical pretreatment of the “all other” fraction comprises the following process units: 
- Sorting cabin for manual separation of recyclables such as cardboard, plastics and glass. 
- Trommel with 60 mm sieves and knifes. 
- Trommel with two different sieve sizes, 150mm in the first part followed by 60mm. 
- Second sorting cabin for separation of non- ferrous metals. 
Refused material from both pretreatment lines is pressed, packed and sent for disposal on 
a controlled sanitary landfill. 
Figure 27 Sorting cabin, bag breaker and tromell at the beginning of the pretreatment of the source separated organics fraction (photo by L. Arsova) 

50



Anaerobic Digestion: 
Anaerobic digestion technology installed on this site is Valorga (high solid content, TS 40- 
45 %). Three anaerobic digesters are installed on the site, each with capacity of 4500 m3. 
The Anaerobic Digestion reactor is operated on mesophilic temperature of 35ºC and retention time of 25 
days. The input material is a mixture of the digested material from the reactor (25%), fresh 
organic material (50-60 %) and water. Constant temperature in the reactor is maintained 
by heating with steam and the mixing of the material in the reactor is secured by 
recirculation of the produced biogas as part of the original design of the Valorga Anaerobic Digestion 
reactor. 
Figure 28 Anaerobic digestion reators, gas tank and the gas stack on the site of Ecopark 2 (photo by L. Arsova) 
The produced biogas is collected from the top of the Anaerobic Digestion reactors and contains on average 
55% of methane. It is first desulfurized and then stored under pressure in gas storage tank. 
Any possible surpluses are burned in a gas stack. There are four generators, each with 
capacity of 1 MW, for utilization of the biogas and production of electricity and steam. The 
steam is used for heating of the Anaerobic Digestion reactors and the electricity is used on the site (59%) 
and the rest (41%) is sold to the grid. In total 20.2 GWh of electricity was produced in 
2008. The digested sludge coming out of the digesters undergoes a dehydration process. 
The resultant solid material is mixed in 3:1 ration with green waste and then treated for 2 
weeks in composting tunnels. The liquid is purified and recirculated in the system. 

51



(Note: the material balance for this plant could not be constructed due to insufficient data.) 
Aerobic composting: 
The organic material separated from the “all other” fraction in the pretreatment is treated 
under controlled conditions in aerobic composting tunnels. There are 17 tunnels 
dimensions of 5x5x34m where the material is kept under controlled humidity, air and 
temperature for 3 weeks. After this period it is disinfected on temperature of 65ºC and kept 
for maturation Anaerobic Digestionditional 4 weeks. At the end of the maturing period the material is refined 
through 10mm trommel and vibrating table. 
The final compost produced here does not meet the required quality to be used in 
agriculture and they have problems selling it. Usually it is used for sides of the roAnaerobic Digestions, parks 
and other public green areas. However they are giving it for free and they do not gain any 
revenues from it. 
Odor control system and waste water treatment: 
The entire facility, including the pretreatment halls and composting tunnels, are under 
negative pressure and the collected air is treated first though acidic scrubber, water 
scrubber, and at the end trough inorganic biofilters. 
Composting leachate and digester effluents are purified WWTP installed on the site before 
releasing it into the public sewage system. 
Figure 29 Rejected material pressed and packed for disposal on controlled landfill (photo by L. Arsova) 

52



Ecopark 3- Ecopark del Mediterrani 
Ecopark 3 is located in the district of Sant Anaerobic Digestionria de Besos, 4.1 mile away from the city 
center. It processes only the “all other” fraction of the municipal solid waste from the 
municipalities of BAnaerobic Digestionalona, Sant Anaerobic Digestionria de Besos, Santa Coloma de Gramenet and the city of 
Barcelona. Due to the exceptional location of this facility, next to the sea and one of the 
most beautiful beaches in Barcelona, they have mAnaerobic Digestione a great effort from the architectural 
point of view to minimize the visual impact of the facility. The facility is surrounded with 
glass facAnaerobic Digestione and has a green roof. Unique characteristic of this plant is that its vertical 
organization, meaning that different units of the plant are one above the other, due to the 
limited area available. Unfortunately at the moment of the visit the plant was not in 
operation due to an accident that happened in March 2009 and was under reconstruction. 
The crash was still under investigation and the reason for it was unknown at that point. 
The crash happened when one of the pipes transferring the digested material from the 
reactor broke and the entire plant was flooded what seriously damaged most of the 
equipment at the facility due to the vertical organization of the process units. This plant has 
total designed capacity of 260,000 t/y of municipal solid waste and Anaerobic Digestion capacity of 90,000 t/y. 
Pretreatment 
Waste entering the plant undergoes mechanical pretreatment at the beginning for 
separation of the recyclable materials from the organic matter. This is performed in two, 
semi-automatic separation lines each having the following process units in series: 
- Primary manual sorting cabin 
- Trommel, 
- Ballistic screen, 
- Magnetic separator (ferrous material), 
- Film separator, 
- Secondary manual sorting cabin, 
- Automatic sorter of PET and PEAnaerobic Digestion, and 
- Inductive separator (non-ferrous material). 
Cleaned organic fraction then passes through a ballistic belt, vibrating screen, magnetic 
separator and film suction for Anaerobic Digestionditional clean up of the contaminants. 
The rejected waste that contains material that cannot be used in Anaerobic Digestion process nor can be 
recycled is sent directly to the pit in the Waste- to – Energy plant, located next to the 
Ecopark 3, by a belt installed in an underground passageway. 

53



Figure 30 Ecopark 3 del Mediterrani (photo by L. Arsova) 
Anaerobic Digestion: 
The organic fraction once cleaned of the contaminants undergoes wet pretreatment. This 
pretreatment is performed in three pulpers each of 20 m3 capacity. Here the organics are 
mixed with water and the solution is homogenized by continuous mixing of the material. 
The resulting suspension goes through a sand trap for final extraction of the heavy and 
floating impurities. This kind of pretreatment is highly effective in extraction of unsuitable 
materials (>90%). Subsequently clarified organic suspension is introduced into two 
digesters each with a volume of 5,700 m3 where the reactions of Anaerobic Digestion of organics take place. 
Anaerobic Digestion technology installed is RosRoca, low solid content process operating on mesophilic 
temperature of 37ºC and retention time of 14-16 days. The biogas produced is extracted 
from the top of digesters, partly compressed and reintroduced into the tank so as to ensure 
constant agitation and prevent the precipitation of materials in the tank. 
Figure 31 Inside of the one of the Anaerobic Digestion reactors 
(pipes for reintroducing the biogas), (photo by L. Arsova) 

54


 
Digested sludge, product of the methanization, is dehydrated using centrifuges separating 
the solids from the liquid fraction. Solid material is shipped to external composting 
facilities and the liquids are treated on the site. Produced biogas is used for electricity 
production in three generators each with capacity of 1.4 KW. They have reported 20.5 
GWh/y of electricity in 2008, half of it used on the site and the other half sold to the grid. 
Figure 32 Material balance at the Anaerobic Digestion plant in the Ecopark 3 
Odor control system and waste water treatment: 
In order to control the odor on the site the entire facility is continuously maintained under 
negative pressure. The airflow collected is treated in two regenerative thermal oxidation 
units (750- 800ºC). 
Waste water is treated on the site before releasing in the recipient. First stage is biological 
trough nitrification- denitrification and second stage is physical- chemical stage that uses 
H2O2 as reducing agent. 
Ecopark 4 
Ecopark 4 is scheduled to become operational in 2010 and will have a treatment capacity of 
300,000 tons of waste per year. This plant is primarily aimed to treat the “all other” 
fraction (260,000 -300,000 tons / year), but separately collected organic material will be 
treated (up to 40.000 t/any) according to the needs. This facility is going to be the biggest 
aerobic composting facility in Europe and will not have any anaerobic digestion. 

55




 
8 IMPORTANT ISSUES RELATED TO THE ANAEROBIC DIGESTION PLANTS 

Although anaerobic digestion as a technology has been applied in the treatment of organic 
material for some time now there are problems and difficulties that are associated to them. 
Hereby the most important issues that are concerning the managers of the existing and the 
potential investors in the future Anaerobic Digestion plants for treatment of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste 
were looked into. 
As a result of this research and in the correspondence with the officials of the plants visited 
the following have been identified as the biggest challenges: 
- Economic feasibility 
- Feedstock quality 
- Efficiency of the Anaerobic Digestion technology 
- Quality of the final compost product 
- Air emissions control 
In the following sections these issues have been discussed in details and specific examples 
from the visits of the Anaerobic Digestion plants in Toronto and Barcelona are given. 


8.1 Economics of the anaerobic digestion plants 

Economic feasibility of the anaerobic digestion plants has been questioned due to the fact 
that the investment as well as the operating costs of these facilities is in the range of the 
mass- burn Waste-to- Energy facilities. The reported numbers state that the operating costs 
for anaerobic digestion facilities are between $77 and $140 per metric ton of capacity, 
whereas mass burn waste treatment  facilities cost between $77 and $190 per metric ton (Levis et al. 
2010). Same is true for the investment costs as will be described later. 
8.1.1 Costs at the Anaerobic Digestion plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona 
The most reliable source of actual costs in at this time is the Dufferin Organics Processing 
Facility that was built for $10 million in 2000 (Arsova 2009b). This number corresponds to 
only $400 per annual ton of capacity and is relatively low to other Anaerobic Digestion plants because 
Dufferin was built as a demonstration prototype, does not have installed equipment for 
mechanical pretreatment for generating electricity from the biogas produced, and for 
curing the product of the Anaerobic Digestion reactor. 
The estimated capital charges, operating costs, and revenues (biogas, compost, gate fees of 
the Dufferin facility are shown in Table 5. 

56


 
Table 5 Estimated costs at the Dufferin Anaerobic Digestion facility (Kelleher 2007) 
In communication with the management of the Anaerobic Digestion facility in Newmarket the researcher 
have been given the breakdown of the costs and revenues but due to the confidentiality 
agreement cannot be published here. However we can just report that the number of the 
operational cost fall in the range of the reported numbers for the Anaerobic Digestion plants (Levis et al. 
2010). Also the officials of the Newmarket plant claim that their plant is operating 
profitably with the revenues covering the cost and gaining Anaerobic Digestionditional income. 
Communication of the authors with the waste management of Toronto has indicated that, 
following the satisfactory results of the Green Bin collection program and operation of the 
Dufferin Anaerobic Digestion facility, the City Council of Toronto has decided to construct two new Anaerobic Digestion plants 
using the Dufferin model and with total capacity of 110,000 tons/year. Preliminary 
estimated capital costs for these two Anaerobic Digestion facilities are $ 69 million, corresponding to about 
$630 per ton of annual capacity (Goldstein 2008). It is interesting to note that this number 
is in the same range as the reported costs of waste-to-energy facilities ($600 to $750 per 
annual ton of capacity, i.e. capital charges of $60-75 per ton of municipal solid waste processed) (Themelis 
2009). The estimated capital charges, operating costs and revenues for these two plants are 
shown in Table 6. 
Table 6 Estimated costs of the new Anaerobic Digestion plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona (Goldstein 2008) 

57


 
8.1.2 Costs of the Ecoparks in Barcelona 

The Environmental Agency of Barcelona is the owner of all facilities but they are given 
under concession of the private companies that built them for a period of 15 years. During 
this period the Environmental Agency is paying 100€ ($130) per ton of waste processed in 
any of the plants. Out of this amount 15€ are to cover the investment costs and 85€ are 
operating costs (Arsova 2009d). 
Revenues from the compost and the electricity go to the managing companies and are not 
available to the public. The investment costs of the plants are shown in the Table 7. 
Table 7 Investment costs of the Anaerobic Digestion plants in Barcelona 
Table 7 shows that the cost per annual ton of installed capacity at Ekopark 1 is almost 
double that of the other two plants. This difference is due to the Anaerobic Digestionditional costs for the 
refurbishment of the original equipment and installation of the new BTA technology. 
Also, the Anaerobic Digestion plants installed in Barcelona have investment cost per annual ton of capacity 
that is one half that of the plants that are planned to be built in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. This is due to the 
operating capacity of the plants; the Anaerobic Digestion plants in Barcelona are almost twice as large as 
those in CanAnaerobic Digestiona and that significantly decreases the investment cost per ton. However, the 
operating costs at all plants are in the same range comparable to the waste treatment  plants. 
The high capital cost of Anaerobic Digestion facilities and the limited revenue from the biogas and compost 
products indicate that the gate fee, to be paid by the citizens or local government, should be 
in the order of $100-150 per ton of waste delivered at the plant. Considering that landfill 
gate fees in the U.S. on average are 42$ per ton indicates that Anaerobic Digestion facilities must be 
subsidized (Arsova et al. 2008) (Gebrezgabher et al. 2010). Therefore, it can be concluded 
from the economic analysis that the investment as well as the operating costs of different 
technologies are in the same range and are not the overriding factor for process selection. 

58



8.2 Feedstock quality 

Purity of the feedstock is essential condition for the success of an Anaerobic Digestion plant. There are three 
important issues directly related to the feedstock quality as follows: 
- the size and the investment cost of the pretreatment 
- quality of the final compost product 
- overall performance of the Anaerobic Digestion system 
Cleaner feedstock needs less intense pretreatment for separation of the impurities. This is 
obvious comparing the plants in Barcelona with the plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. The prior have a 
mechanical separation part of the plant noticeable bigger than the plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. This is 
to expect having in mind that the plants in Barcelona were originally designed to process 
the source separated organics and “all the rest” fraction and the plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona were exclusively designed for 
treatment of source separated organics. The intensive pretreatment le Anaerobic Digestions to higher investment and operating 
costs contributing to the high prize of the Anaerobic Digestion treatment. 
Production of the marketable compost is of a great importance since it is a source of 
revenue. However it has to meet quality requirements prior it can be used as soil 
conditioner on agricultural land and it is ultimately related to the feedstock purity. The Anaerobic Digestion 
plants in Barcelona produce compost from the source separated organics and “all other” fraction with noticeable 
difference in its quality. The compost produced from the “all other” fraction does not meet 
the quality requirements. On the other side Anaerobic Digestion plants in CanAnaerobic Digestiona does not have a problem 
with the quality of the compost what is due to the fact that they process much cleaner 
feedstock, 23- 30% of contaminants comparing to 40-70% of impurities in the feedstock in 
the plants in Barcelona (Arsova 2009b; Arsova 2009c; Arsova 2009d) . 
Very important to emphasize is that the bAnaerobic Digestion feedstock can cause a technical problems and 
disturb the overall performance of the Anaerobic Digestion plant, as seen in the Anaerobic Digestion plants in Barcelona. 
According to the officials in Barcelona the plants perform much better and have fewer 
problems since they are processing only source separated organics fraction in the Anaerobic Digestion (Arsova 2009d). 
One of the solutions for the problem with the quality of the feedstock is to educate the 
waste generators. It is of great importance to have citizens aware of the significance the Anaerobic Digestion 
of the organic waste and well informed about the proper source separation of this fraction. 
Also cleaner feedstock can be collected from fresh markets, deli markets, restaurants etc. 
However, getting fairly clean feedstock has shown to be very problematic even in well 
informed and highly environmentally sensible societies such as Toronto, Barcelona, and 
Wien. The contaminants at the plant of Biogas Wien amounts to 30% of the feedstock what 
confirms the difficulties experienced in Toronto and Barcelona with collecting pure organic 
waste stream (Themelis 2009). 


8.3 Quality of the final compost product 

There are numerous possibilities of application of the compost in the horticulture. It has 
been used the most by landscapers, lawn care companies, golf courses, nurseries, and retail 

59



garden centers, while its use in commercial growing is not very common (Levis et al. 2010). 
Also the lower quality compost can be successfully used on the roAnaerobic Digestion side projects what is 
the case with the compost from the Anaerobic Digestion plants in Barcelona (Arsova 2009d). Erosion control 
is another growing market for this product (Barlaz et al. 2008). The main reasons for using 
compost are: to increase water penetration and retention, improve drought resistance, 
improve soil tillage properties, build humus content, improve plant health, suppress weeds, 
and use fewer chemicals (Levis et al. 2010). 
Ensuring the quality of the compost and the availability of compost markets is of crucial 
importance in ensuring revenues from this product. There are two sources of concern 
related to the quality of the compost. First the compost produced from low quality 
feedstock does not meet the quality requirements to be used in agriculture and second the 
compost that meets the criteria has shown inconsistence in the quality. 
According to the general manager of the Newmarket Anaerobic Digestion plant the compost they produce 
meets the quality requirements for agricultural use and that they have no problems selling 
it on the market. Even more he said that they can sell Anaerobic Digestionditional amounts if they were to 
produce more compost. The situation in Barcelona is totally opposite. First the compost 
produced from “all other” fraction is not of the required quality and second even they 
produce good compost from the source separated organics the demand on the market is very low. Even though 
the Barcelona area is agricultural there is still public resistance to use compost produced 
from waste as soil conditioner. In this situation the officials in Barcelona are constantly 
conduction public campaigns and giving the compost for free. 


8.4 Efficiency of the technologies installed 

Overall efficiency of the Anaerobic Digestion technologies installed in Toronto and Barcelona in term of the 
production of biogas, compost and electricity for each plant are given in the table 7. 
From the reported numbers Valorga technology seems to be the most efficient one. This 
goes along with the fact that Valorga is the most favorable technology around the globe, as 
explained earlier. According to the officials in Barcelona and based on their experience with 
different Anaerobic Digestion technologies, Valorga is also the most flexible technology when it comes to the 
quality of the feedstock. It is robust technology easy to maintain and much flexible to the 
quality of the feedstock them the others (Arsova 2009d). 

60



Table 8 Efficiency of the installed Anaerobic Digestion technologies in the Ecoparks of Barcelona 


8.5 Air emissions control 

Odors emitted from the Anaerobic Digestion plants are one problem that urges the public against these 
plants. Main sources of the odors are the pretreatment and the aerobic composting. Even 
though all the plants are maintained under negative pressure this problems still remains 
open in almost all visited facilities. The two plants without any problems caused by the 
odor are the Dufferin and Ecopark 3 in Barcelona, and the common thing is that these 
facilities do not have the aerobic composting facilities on their sites. Also Anaerobic Digestion plants located 
in industrial zones (e.g. Dufferin, Ekopark 1, 2) do not recognize the odor as a problem 
because their surroundings do not complain about it. On the other side the Anaerobic Digestion plant in 
Newmarket due to the complains from the neighboring residential settlements is operating 
under court order with much smaller capacity then the installed and was required to make 
big changes in the odor monitoring and control system. 
Also the air emissions of these plants include certain percentage of produced methane. 
Since it is impossible to collect 100% of the produced biogas certain amount ends in the 
atmosphere increasing the carbon footprint of these plants. These fugitive emissions are of 
specific interest because not just it le anaerobic Digestions to air pollution but also are a sink of organic 
material that can be otherwise utilized if the biogas was to collected in perfectly controlled 
manner. The fugitive emissions from the Anaerobic Digestion plants of municipal solid waste have been reported as 1% of 
the total production of the methane on the site (Thomas D. DiStefano & Belenky 2009). 

61





9 ANAEROBIC ACIDOGENESIS OF FOOD WASTE AND POTENTIAL USE OF ITS PRODUCTS AS A SUPPLEMENTAL CARBON SOURCE FOR BIOLOGICAL NITROGEN REMOVAL (BNR) FROM WASTEWATER 


9.1 Motivation and objectives 

Anaerobic digestion has been recognized as the best option for the treatment of the 
organic fraction of the municipal solid waste and superior to the landfilling and aerobic composting 
(Morton A Barlaz et al. 2008). Therefore, as described previously, there have been 
numerous plants designed and built for this purpose. However despite the success stories 
of many Anaerobic Digestion plants and the production of “green” energy and compost, this technology is 
also some problems. As an alternative to methane generation, food waste can be 
bioreacted to yield volatile fatty acids (VFA); these acids may be used to promote 
denitrification in carbon limited wastewater streams, in place of using supplemental 
carbon sources such as methanol. Typically, the wastewater treatment utilities Anaerobic Digestiond 
external organic electron donors to enhance the denitrification rates (GrAnaerobic Digestiony et al. 1999). 
Most commonly used among the external electron donors is methanol, mainly due to its 
lower cost as compared to ethanol and acetate (Louzeiro et al. 2003). 
The anaerobic acidogenesis process comprises the reactions of hydrolysis, fermentation 
and acetogenesis. These reactions precede the methanogenesis step in the anaerobic 
digestion (Anaerobic Digestion) process. This study examined whether the effluent VFA from the anaerobic 
acidogenesis of the food waste can be used as an external carbon source for the 
denitrification in WWTP. 
When compared to anaerobic digestion (Anaerobic Digestion), acidogenesis le anaerobic Digestioning to VFA offers the 
Anaerobic Digestionvantages of lower capital and operating costs. This is due to the shorter residence time 
required. Furthermore, this process is amenable to easier control of fugitive emissions.. 
Also, VFA produced in this manner could be more cost-effective and sustainable than the 
use of methanol. 
The specific objectives of this experimental study were to: 
1. Demonstrate the potential of recovering volatile fatty acids by means of acidogenesis of 
food waste in bench-scale experiments. 
2. Quantify the biokinetics of denitrification bymeans of VFA contained in the effluent of 
acidogenesis, under laboratory conditions. 


9.2 Materials and methods 

9.2.1 Anaerobic acidogenesis of the food waste 

A bench scale experimental study was conducted in a 6-liters glass reactor equipped with a 
water jacket for maintaining a constant temperature of 37°C (mesophilic bacteria reaction). 
The pH was continuously controlled and maintained at pH=6.5, by injection of a buffer 
solution of 1 M sodium bicarbonate and 1 M sodium hydroxide. A Teflon stirrer blAnaerobic Digestione 

62



provided continuous mixing of the material in the reactor. The reactor was operated in - 
batch mode for four weeks (results are not shown here) and in chemostat mode for three 
months (November 2009- January 2010). Retention time (RT) during the chemostat mode 
was 4 days. The seed biomass was provided by Halton Recycling Inc. (Newmarket, Ontario, 
CanAnaerobic Digestiona) and originated from their Anaerobic Digestion plant treating organic waste. 
The feedstock to the reactor was food waste from the campus restaurant, consisting of 
mixed cooked and fresh food leftovers. Fresh feed material was prepared once a week and 
was stored at 4°C. The preparation included homogenization in a kitchen blender, diluting 
with water and sampling for further analyses. The average organic loAnaerobic Digestioning rate was 13000 
mg total COD/l/day and 3200 mg soluble COD/l/day of food waste. Both, the feed material 
and the digestate from the reactor, were sampled three times per week for measuring the 
parameters shown in Table 9. 
Table 9 Monitored parameters 
All laboratory analyses were conducted according to Standard Methods for Examination of 
Water and Waste water (Eaton et al. 2005). Volatile Fatty Acid speciation and the 
concentration were analyzed in a Metrohm 861 Anaerobic Digestionvanced Compact Ion Chromatographer. 
Samples for testing the soluble COD were filtered through0.45 µm filter paper. 

9.2.2 Biokinetics of the denitrification 

Denitrification biokinetics were determined via ‘‘extant’’ batch assays (Chandran & Smets, 
2001) using nitrate as electron acceptor. Denitrification rates were determined via influent 

63



and effluent nitrate (ion-selective electrode, Accumet) and influent total COD 
measurements. Also, the pH and ORP values were measured. 
The methanol and ethanol microbial consortia were cultivated in sequenced batch reactor 
(SBR) as reported by Bayshtok et al., 2009. These denitrification consortia were tested for 
their affinity to use VFA from the food waste digester as supplemental carbon source 
insteAnaerobic Digestion methanol/ethanol. For these denitrification rate assays the biomass was 
withdrawn from the SBR just prior to the start of the ‘‘settle’’ phase and washed by 
centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature and resuspended in COD and 
nitrate free feed medium bubbled with N2 gas. The digestate from the food waste reactor 
was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature and filtered through 0.45 
µm filter paper, in order to remove any biomass, prior to being used as carbon source for 
specific denitrification rate test (sDNR). 
Initial carbon source and nitrate concentrations in the batch biokinetics assays were 250 
mg COD/l and 100 mg NO3- -N/l respectively. This initial COD: N ratio of 2.5:1, lower than 
based on stochiometric COD: N requirements of 5:1 for nitrate, rendered the organic 
carbon as limiting nutrient (GrAnaerobic Digestiony ate al., 1999). The sDNR was computed by linear 
regression of the nitrate depletion profiles normalized to the tCOD of the batch test beaker 
(Bayshtok et al. 2009). 


9.3 Results 

9.3.1 Anaerobic acidogenesis of food waste: 

The concentration of the fermentate was between 43,000 mg COD/l and 111,000 mg COD/l 
consisted on average of 50% of sCOD. The average concentration of the volatile fatty acids 
(VFAs) in the sCOD was 17.5 %. Results of the measurements performed on the key 
parameters are given in Table 10. 
Table 10 Values of the monitored parameters in the fermentate 

64



Measured parameters were used to calculate the performance ratios of the anaerobic 
acidogenesis. Following ratios were monitored: sCOD/ NH4+, sCOD/sKN and sKN/ NH4+ and 
the results are shown in Table 11. 
Table 11 Performance Ratios 
The conversion rates were calculated based on the direct measurement of the total feed 
COD (tCODf), the soluble and VFA COD in the feed material (sCODf, VFA CODf) and the 
digestate (sCODd, VFA CODd). The conversion rates were calculated using the following 
equations: 
The minimum, maximum as well as the average and the standard deviation of the results 
for these conversion rates are provided in the Table 12. 
Table 12 Conversion rates 
The VFA concentration in mg COD/l in the fermentate was in the range between 3,300 mg 
COD/l and 6,560 mgCOD/l. The most common volatile fatty acids in the sCOD were acetic, 
propionic, n-butiric and valeric acid. The n-butiric acid hAnaerobic Digestion the highest concentration in 
mgCOD/l followed by the propionic and acetic acid, while the valeric acid hAnaerobic Digestion the lowest 
concentration. The concentration of different species of the VFAs changed with time and 
the evolution of each of them is ilustrated in the Figure 33. 

65



From the figures it can be noticed that the concentration of the acetic and valeric acid were 
stable over the time. Oposite to the these, the propionic and n-butyric acid showed high 
variability in the concentration, especialy the n-butyric acid. 
Figure 33 Evolution of the concentrations of the VFAs in the fermented material 
During the operating time of the reactor there was production of small amounts of gas. This 
happened occasionally and there was no continuous production. In total during the 
operation of the reactor there were ten samples of gas. In eight samples methane was 
found in average concentration of 0.6%, seven of the samples contained nitrogen in 
concentration of 2.2% on average, and in all ten samples the concentration of the CO2 was 
on average 26.5%. Therefore, selective acidogenesis with almost complete elimination of 
methanogenesis of food waste was successfully demonstrated. 

9.3.2 Specific denitrification rate tests (SDNR) 

The SDNR tests showed that the ethanol cultivated biomass was more successful in using 
the effluent of the food waste digestion as carbon source than methanol cultivated biomass. 
The results of these tests are shown in Table 13. 
Table 13 Results of the specific denitrification rate tests 

66



There was a slight difference in the concentration of different VFAs in the carbon source 
illustrated in the Figure 34. 
Figure 34 SDNR results and VFA speciation in the supplemental carbon source 


9.4 Discussion of experimental part of thesis 

9.4.1 Anaerobic acidogenesis of the food waste; 

Many researchers have studied the suitability of the VFAs for denitrification. Among the 
others Gerber et al. 1987 has reported that the denitrification rates for acetate, propionate 
and butyrate were as much as four times higher than for methanol and ethanol. Also Tam et 

67



al. 1992 has reported acetate as being more efficient as carbon source for nutrient removal 
compared to methanol or glucose. 
Achieved conversion rate of the feed tCOD to digestate sCOD in our reactor was higher than 
reported for biomass destruction, 22% on average (Ezenekwe et al. 2002). Also the 
concentration of the sCOD in the tCOD of the digested material was higher than reported 
17% for mesophilic plug-flow anaerobic fermenter using mechanically-sorted organic 
waste (Sans et al. 1995). However the acetogenesis rate was not that successful and the 
concentration of VFA in the sCOD was lower than previously reported 85-90% for primary 
sludge fermentate (P. Elefsiniotis & G. D. Wareham 2006), around 50% for effluent from 
anaerobicaly treated 1:1 mixture of starch- rich industrial and municipal wastewater 
(Katehis et al. 2003), and 80% reported for anaerobic acidogenesis of food waste (Llabres 
et al. 1999; S.-J. Lim et al. 2008). These numbers are not directly comparable because the 
experimental conditions differ but can give an overall idea of range of results that have 
been reported. Main reasons for the big difference between previously reported and the 
results from our experiment may be due to different retention time or the composition of 
the feed material. 
The performance ratios sCOD/NH3, sCOD/sKN, sKN/NH3 obtained in our reactor were 
much better than average reported values of 65, 9 and 0.7 respectively (Ezenekwe et al. 
2002). 
Among the analysed volatile fatty acids, the acetic hAnaerobic Digestion the most constant concentration 
while the biggest fluctuations were noticed in the concentration of the n-butyric acid. It can 
also be noticed that after the 50th day of operation the trends of the concentration of the 
VFA were constant, except for the n-butyric acid, and at the very end the concentrations 
hAnaerobic Digestion very similar values. Unfortunately, we were unable to determine any relation between 
the concentration of the different VFA in the carbon source and the SDNR results. 

9.4.2 Specific denitrification rates 

The results of the SDNR tests performed with the fermentate from our reactor showed that 
the VFA naturally produced in the anaerobic acidogenesis of food waste are suitable 
supplemental carbon source for denitrification. The biomass cultivated on ethanol showed 
higher SDNR that the biomass cultivated on methanol. 
However the SDNR results for both, ethanol and methanol cultivated biomass, were 
comparable to the previously reported denitrification rates achieved using VFA produced 
from different organic materials. Reported SDNR values are shown in Table 13. The SDNR 
results of our experiment, average of 0.15 an 0.51 mg N/mg volatile suspended solids-d for methanol and ethanol 
cultivated biomass respectively, are better than previously reported values. 

68



Table 14 SDNR results reported in previous studies 
Compared to the results of the same sDNR tests conducted with methanol as carbon source 
and methanol cultivated biomass the results with our carbon source were lower (Bayshtok 
et al. 2009). The reason for this might be the acclimatization period that bacteria used for 
conducting the sDNR tests need to get used to new carbon source (P Elefsiniotis et al. 
2004). In our case the methylotrophic bacteria showed lower affinity to the new carbon 
source then the ethanol degrAnaerobic Digestioning bacteria. 





10 DISCUSSION 

This study has elaborated the anaerobic digestion technology, its application in the 
treatment of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste as well as the difficulties and the challenges 
that the Anaerobic Digestion plants management and the technology developers are facing. 

69



Anaerobic digestion has technically been proven to be successful in treating the organic 
waste and resulting in biogas and compost as final products, both marketable and 
produced this way are contribute to increasing the sustainability of the waste management. 
As a result of the long experience with the application of the Anaerobic Digestion technology in treating farm 
manure and sewage sludge at the WWTP few decAnaerobic Digestiones ago this technology was applied for 
the first time in treating the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste. Most of these plants were built 
and are still operating in the EU and were result of the European legislation to divert all 
organic waste from the landfills. 
Although the treating the organic fraction in anaerobic reactors showed success and more 
than 120 Anaerobic Digestion plants for treatment of the source separated organics fraction are operating in Europe there are still 
problems and challenges that this technology needs to overcome. As discussed earlier, the 
economics of these plants are still not positive. According to all the analysis previously 
showed this is still very expensive technology, both the investment and operation costs are 
in the range of the waste treatment  plants and need to be subsidized in order to be affordable for the 
citizens. 
Another challenge is the collection of clean feedstock what has been seen as one major 
problem even in places consider highly sensitive to environmental issues and educated 
about waste separation. As we have shown previously this has been identified as a problem 
in Toronto, Barcelona and Wien. The quality of the feedstock determines the size and the 
price of the pretreatment of the material as well as the efficiency of the anaerobic digestion 
process in the quality of the compost final product. The quality of the feedstock is strongly 
related to the overall economics of these plants since it determines the marketability of the 
compost product as well as the amount of the biogas that can be produced and used for 
electricity production. 
Furthermore from the environmental point the airborne emissions of these plants have 
been identified as a burden. Anaerobic Digestion plants that have aerobic composting installed on the site 
for production of final compost product are facing difficulties with odor causing emissions 
that have led to closing and limiting of the operating capacity of some of the plants. Also 
together with odor causing emissions there is a certain amount of methane emitted in the 
air, reported as fugitive emission. This amount in certain cases can be significant and 
contribute to increasing the carbon footprint of this otherwise considered green plants. 
Also in some cases the technology vendors and the design of the Anaerobic Digestion plants have failed and 
problems like explosions and inefficient organic decomposition are occurring. For example 
at the Newmarket plant in CanAnaerobic Digestiona due to financial difficulties the hydrolysis tank was not 
built what is now resulting in less efficient decomposition of the organics and having high 
concentration of organic material that ends strait in the aerobic composting insteAnaerobic Digestion of 
going through the Anaerobic Digestion first and contribute to higher production of methane. 
Beside the challenges related to the Anaerobic Digestion of the organic fraction of the municipal solid waste there is another 
important existing problem on the WWTP and related to the denitrification stage of the 
wastewater. This stage of the WWTP requires Anaerobic Digestiondition of carbon source in order to be 
completed. Most of the WWTP are now using methanol as the cheapest form of the 

70



supplemental carbon source although shown to be not the most efficient one. As presented 
earlier, many studies have proven that the denitrification is more efficient with acetate and 
ethanol as a supplemental carbon source but their application on commercial WWTP is not 
feasible due to the high costs. 
Having the Anaerobic Digestion treatment and the challenges coupled with it on one side and the 
denitrification as a problem on the WWTP on the other side the idea of connecting them 
and making them both more efficient came along. As described through experimental study 
we perform anaerobic acidogenesis from food waste and then we tested the acidic product 
as a supplemental carbon source for denitrification. The results confirmed the hypothesis 
that this is possible and that further research needs to be done towards its application in 
the commercial WWTP. 
Shifting from methanol to VFAs in the denitrification of the wastewater would have many 
Anaerobic Digestionvantages. Many of the existing WWTP have alreAnaerobic Digestiony installed anaerobic digesters for 
treatment of the sewage sludge that can be used for acidogenesis and production of VFAs. 
This can be performed in co-digestion with food waste and can further improve both, the 
solid waste and the wastewater management. 
In order to see what might be the benefits of the shifting from methanol to VFAs for the 
purpose of this study, Anaerobic Digestionditional calculations were mAnaerobic Digestione, based on the experimental results 
and the stoichiometry of the denitrification process with methanol and VFA. The purpose 
was to see how much of methanol would be replaced by VFAs and what are the potential 
benefits of that (Arsova 2010). Here are the findings: 
Table 15 Comparison of the methanol and VFA mixture based on stochiometry 
These results show that the amount of VFA mixture needed to remove 1 g N-NO3 is about 
the same as for methanol. However the amount of biomass produced during denitrification 
with VFA mixture is larger than in the case of denitrification with methanol. This is 
important from the point that more biomass le anaerobic Digestions to higher denitrification rate and more 
efficient denitrification. This corresponds to the experimental results reported by previous 

71



studies that observed that denitrifiers prefer acetate over methanol and these results in 
higher denitrification rates. 
Also, although the same amount is needed, the VFA mixture is less costly because it can be 
produced on the WWTP site using the existing Anaerobic Digestion reactors. In this case, the VFA mixture 
can be produced from the WWTP sludge or even in co-digestion with the food waste from 
the municipal solid waste. 
It is important to emphasize that these results were obtained on the basis of stoichiometric 
calculations and may not be the perfect representation of what may occur in actual tests 
and on the field. 





11 CONCLUSIONS 

Anaerobic digestion is a proven technology for processing source-separated organic waste 
and has experienced significant growth during the last 15 years. This technology is 
superior to the landfiling and also the aerobic composting of the source separated organics. The most successful 
Anaerobic Digestion processes at this time are high-solids, thermophilic processes that can produce up to 
125 standard cubic meters of biogas per ton of feedstock, at 50-60% methane 
concentration. Among the available technologies worldwide, Valorga has been proven to be 
the most widely used, with the largest number of plants and highest installed capacity. 
Furthermore Valorga plants have reported the highest biogas yield and are most flexible 
with regard to feedstock quality. 

72




 
Despite the fact that the Anaerobic Digestion technology has been widely applied in Europe there are only 
two Anaerobic Digestion plants in North America, specifically designed for food waste processing and both 
of them are serving the population of metropolitan Toronto in CanAnaerobic Digestiona. In Anaerobic Digestiondition, there is 
one WWTP co-digesting food waste and biosolids. In Europe Anaerobic Digestion has become part of the 
integrated solid waste management systems, as seen in the case of Barcelona. 
Even though Anaerobic Digestion is effective, there are problems associated with the application of this 
technology in diverting organics from the landfills and composting facilities. Modern Anaerobic Digestion 
plants are fairly costly with investment cost up to about $600 per annual ton of capacity. 
This number was based on the projections for the new Anaerobic Digestion plants planned to be built in 
Toronto and is corroborated by the new Anaerobic Digestion plant built for the City of Vienna next to the 
Pfafeneau waste treatment  plant. Also, the operating costs of these plants are fairly high in the range of 
$100-150 per ton of waste delivered at the plant which is comparable to the gate fees at 
Waste-to- Energy plants and much higher than the average landfill gate fee in the U.S. of 
$42 per ton. These high costs as well as the experiences with Dufferin and Barcelona Anaerobic Digestion 
plants suggest that Anaerobic Digestion facilities need to be subsidized by the government. 
Anaerobic Digestionditional difficulties in the operation of Anaerobic Digestion plants are due to the problem of getting fairly 
clean feedstock what on the other side is crucial factor for the compost quality and the 
overall efficiency of the Anaerobic Digestion process. Most of these plants are supplied by source separated organics material from 
the separate waste collection systems. Even so, they still generate residue amounting from 
25% at the plants in Toronto, 30% in Wien to up to 40% and higher in Barcelona. It is 
therefore, very important for communities served by Anaerobic Digestion to exercise the discipline required 
to minimize contamination of source-separated organic waste and for the Anaerobic Digestion process to 
include extensive pretreatment for contaminant separation. 
As demonstrated at the Newmarket facility, control of odor emissions is of the utmost 
importance. This entails fully enclosed facilities, including the feedstock deliver bay, the 
curing stage of the process, and collection and treatment of the plant air in complex air 
treatment system. 
The experimental study carried out as the second part of this project has shown that the 
anaerobic acetogenesis of food waste is a feasible alternative to biogas generation. The 
volatile fatty acids (VFA) produced from food waste in a biochemical reactor can be used as 
a suitable supplemental carbon source for enhancing the denitrification rate in WWTP, in 
place of the currently used methanol. This finding is of special importance because this 
carbon source can lower the operating costs of denitrification, decrease the capital and 
operating costs of the anaerobic digestion of source-separated food waste, and reduce the 
greenhouse gas emissions of both processes. These results have contributed to a Patent 
Disclosure for such a process, filed with Columbia Technology Ventures. 





12 SUGGESTED FURTHER RESEARCH 

Further research is necessary to collect Anaerobic Digestionditional data on the use of the organic acids 
produced from the anaerobic digestion of food waste as supplemental carbon source for 

73



the denitrification of WWTP effluents. Also, further experiments should be performed for 
identifying the optimum operating parameters for producing higher concentrations of 
VFAs in the liquid product of an acetogenesis reactor. In Anaerobic Digestiondition, technical and economic 
feasibility studies of the environmental and economic aspects of the industrial application 
of this process alternative should be carried out.

74


