What a Waste 2.0
A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 2050 



Urban Development Series 
The Urban Development Series discusses the challenge of urbanization and 
what it will mean for developing countries in the decades ahead. The series 
aims to delve substantively into a range of core issues related to urban development 
that policy makers and practitioners must address. 
Cities and Climate Change: Responding to an Urgent Agenda 
Climate Change, Disaster Risk, and the Urban Poor: Cities Building 
Resilience for a Changing World 
East Asia and Pacific Cities: Expanding Opportunities for the Urban Poor 
East Asia’s Changing Urban Landscape: Measuring a Decade of Spatial 
Growth 
The Economics of Uniqueness: Investing in Historic City Cores and 
Cultural Heritage Assets for Sustainable Development 
Financing Transit-Oriented Development with Land Values: Adapting 
Land Value Capture in Developing Countries 
Regenerating Urban Land: A Practitioner’s Guide to Leveraging Private 
Investment 
Transforming Cities with Transit: Transit and Land-Use Integration for 
Sustainable Urban Development 
Urban Risk Assessments: Understanding Disaster and Climate Risk in 
Cities 
What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 2050 
All books in the Urban Development Series are available free at 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2174.



What a Waste 2.0 
A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste 
Management to 2050 
Silpa Kaza, Lisa Yao, Perinaz Bhada-Tata, and 
Frank Van Woerden 
With Kremena Ionkova, John Morton, 
Renan Alberto Poveda, Maria Sarraf, Fuad Malkawi, 
A.S. Harinath, Farouk Banna, Gyongshim An, 
Haruka Imoto, and Daniel Levine





Acknowledgments 

What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 
2050 was authored by a core team composed of Silpa Kaza, Lisa Yao, 
Perinaz Bhada-Tata, and Frank Van Woerden. The study was led by Silpa 
Kaza (Task Team Leader), Frank Van Woerden (Co–Task Team Leader), and 
Daniel Levine (Co–Task Team Leader). This effort was generously funded 
by the government of Japan through the World Bank’s Tokyo Development 
Learning Center (TDLC). Daniel Levine and Haruka Imoto represented the 
TDLC and provided strategic guidance and administrative support from 
the project’s design to finalization. The study was prepared by the World 
Bank’s Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice in collaboration 
with the Environment Global Practice. 
The team thanks the following individuals for their valuable guidance: 
Paul Kriss for advising the team from the beginning, Philip Karp for advising 
the team on the study and dissemination strategy, Stephane Hallegatte for 
his guidance on the projections methodology, Mersedeh TariVerdi for her 
robust modeling of waste generation projections, and Catalina Marulanda 
for advising the team on technical content. 
Each section of the report was written by the following individuals: 
- Chapter 1 (Introduction) was written by Silpa Kaza and Frank Van 
Woerden 
- Chapter 2 (At a Glance: A Global Picture of Solid Waste Management) 
was written by Silpa Kaza and Lisa Yao 
- Chapter 3 (Regional Snapshots) was written by Silpa Kaza and 
Lisa Yao with inputs from regional focal points 
- Chapter 4 (Waste Administration and Operations) was written by 
Lisa Yao with contributions from Frank Van Woerden 
- Chapter 5 (Financing and Cost Recovery for Waste Management 
Systems) was written by Lisa Yao with contributions from Frank Van 
Woerden



- Chapter 6 (Waste and Society) was written by Silpa Kaza, Lisa Yao, 
and Perinaz Bhada-Tata with contributions from Frank Van Woerden 
- Chapter 7 (Case Studies) was edited by Lisa Yao and Silpa Kaza and 
written by Perinaz Bhada-Tata, Thierry Martin, Kevin Serrona, Ritu 
Thakur, Flaviu Pop, Shiko Hayashi, Gustavo Solorzano, Nadya Selene 
Alencastro Larios, Renan Alberto Poveda, and Anis Ismail 
The data collection efforts and case studies were led by World Bank solid 
waste experts serving as regional focal points along with support from consultants 
collecting and documenting information on solid waste management 
data and practices globally. Each regional team was structured as 
follows: 
- Latin America and the Caribbean: John Morton and Renan Alberto 
Poveda served as the regional focal points, with data collection and 
case study support from Nadya Selene Alencastro Larios, Cauam 
Cardoso, Bernardo Deregibus, and Gustavo Solorzano. 
- Sub-Saharan Africa: Gyongshim An and Farouk Mollah Banna served 
as the regional focal points, with data collection and case study support 
from Dede Raissa Adomayakpor, Thierry Martin, and Emily 
Sullivan. 
- East Asia and Pacific: Frank Van Woerden served as the regional focal 
point, with data collection and case study support from Kevin Serrona. 
- South Asia: A.S. Harinath served as the regional focal point, with data 
collection and case study support from Ritu Thakur. 
- Middle East and North Africa: Fuad Malkawi and Maria Sarraf served 
as the regional focal points, with data collection and case study support 
from Anis Ismail, Omar Ouda, and Ali Abedini. 
- Europe and Central Asia: Kremena Ionkova served as the regional focal 
point, with data collection and case study support from Flaviu Pop. 
- Japan: Haruka Imoto served as the focal point, with data collection 
and case study support from Shiko Hayashi. 
- High-income countries: Perinaz Bhada-Tata served as the focal 
point for remaining high-income countries and provided data collection 
and case study support. Madhumitha Raj assisted in the 
collection of data. 
Perinaz Bhada-Tata oversaw the data management and validation 
process, and all data and sources were validated by Perinaz Bhada-Tata, 
Madhumitha Raj, and Henry Shull. James Michelsen was paramount to 
finalizing the selection of data metrics. Rubaina Anjum provided content on 
food loss and waste for the report. 
Mersedeh TariVerdi supported the modeling of the projections and 
developed the regression model under the guidance of Stephane Hallegatte. 
The methodology for projections benefited greatly from the technical expertise 
of Paolo Avner and analytical support from Lisa Yao.



Acknowledgments xv 
Tony Fujs and Meera Desai from the World Bank’s Development 
Economics Group created the database for all waste management data collected 
and designed the interactive website to host the data. 
The study was prepared under the guidance of Ede Ijjasz-Vasquez, 
senior director of the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice; 
Sameh Wahba, director of Urban and Territorial Development, Disaster 
Risk Management, and Resilience; Maitreyi Das, practice manager; and 
Senait Assefa, practice manager. 
Peer reviewers from numerous organizations provided critical expert 
comments. The team thanks Stephen Hammer, practice manager of 
Climate Analytics and Advisory Services; Catalina Marulanda, practice 
manager of the South Asia Urban Unit; Daniel Hoornweg, author of What 
a Waste: A Global Review of Solid Waste Management and professor and 
research chair at the University of Ontario Institute of Technology; Fabien 
Mainguy, senior project manager at Suez Environnement; James Law, 
International Solid Waste Association Board member and project director 
at SCS Engineers; and Makoto Mihara, director of the Environment 
Bureau in Osaka.
Tokyo Development Learning Center
The TDLC program is a partnership of Japan and the 
World Bank. TDLC supports and facilitates strategic World 
Bank Group and client country collaboration with select 
Japanese cities, agencies, and partners for joint research, 
knowledge exchange, capacity building, and other activities 
that develop opportunities to link Japanese and 
global expertise with specific project-level engagements 
in developing countries to maximize development impact. 



1 





CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 

Solid waste management is a universal issue affecting every single person 
in the world. Individuals and governments make decisions about consumption 
and waste management that affect the daily health, productivity, 
and cleanliness of communities. Poorly managed waste is contaminating the 
world’s oceans, clogging drains and causing flooding, transmitting diseases 
via breeding of vectors, increasing respiratory problems through airborne 
particles from burning of waste, harming animals that consume waste 
unknowingly, and affecting economic development such as through diminished 
tourism. Unmanaged and improperly managed waste from decades of 
economic growth requires urgent action at all levels of society. 
As countries develop from low-income to middle- and high-income 
levels, their waste management situations also evolve. Growth in prosperity 
and movement to urban areas are linked to increases in per capita generation 
of waste. Furthermore, rapid urbanization and population growth create 
larger population centers, making the collection of all waste and the 
procuring of land for treatment and disposal more and more difficult. 
Urban waste management is expensive. Waste management can be the 
single highest budget item for many local administrations in low-income 
countries, where it comprises nearly 20 percent of municipal budgets, on 
average. In middle-income countries, solid waste management typically 
accounts for more than 10 percent of municipal budgets, and it accounts 
for about 4 percent in high-income countries. Budget resources devoted to 
waste management can be much higher in certain cases. 
Costly and complex waste operations must compete for funding with 
other priorities such as clean water and other utilities, education, and 
health care. Waste management is often administered by local authorities 
with limited resources and limited capacity for planning, contract 



2

management, and operational monitoring. These factors make sustainable 
waste management a complicated proposition on the path of economic 
development, and most low- and middle-income countries and their cities 
struggle to address the challenges. The impacts of poor waste management 
are dire and fall disproportionally on the poor, who are often unserved or 
have little influence on the waste being disposed of formally or informally 
near their homes. 
Waste management data are critical to creating policy and planning for 
the local context. Understanding how much waste is generated—especially 
with rapid urbanization and population growth—as well as the types of 
waste being generated, allows local governments to select appropriate management 
methods and plan for future demand. This knowledge allows governments 
to design systems with a suitable number of vehicles, establish 
efficient routes, set targets for diversion of waste, track progress, and adapt 
as waste generation patterns change. With accurate data, governments can 
realistically allocate budget and land, assess relevant technologies, and consider 
strategic partners, such as the private sector or nongovernmental organizations, 
for service provision. 
This report builds on previous World Bank publications from 2012 and 
1999 titled What a Waste: A Global Review of Solid Waste Management 
(Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata 2012) and What a Waste: Solid Waste 
Management in Asia (Hoornweg and Thomas 1999). This current edition 
of What a Waste expands on the type of data collected and includes 
217 countries and economies and 367 cities. The data are updated to 
recent years, and the waste generation data are scaled to a single year to 
allow for comparison across countries and economies. The projections 
for waste generation use the most comprehensive database available to 
date to determine how waste generation dynamically changes based on 
changes in economic development and population growth. The metrics 
included in this report expand from solid waste management generation, 
composition, collection, treatment, and disposal to include information 
on financing and costs, institutional arrangements and policies, administrative 
and operational models, citizen engagement, special waste, and 
the informal sector. 
Although the data from the past and current publications are not fully 
comparable because of methodological differences, there are some clear 
trends to report since 2012. The change in the composition of waste in lowincome 
countries reflects changes in consumption patterns—the share of 
organic waste fell from 64 percent to 56 percent. The collection of waste in 
low-income countries significantly increased from about 22 percent to 
39 percent, reflecting the prioritization of adequate waste collection in cities 
and countries. This progress is complemented by an overall global trend of 
increased recycling and composting. Finally, waste-to-energy incineration 
in upper-middle-income countries markedly increased from 0.1 percent to 
10 percent, driven by China’s shift to incineration. 



3

What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 
2050 targets decision makers, policy makers, and influencers globally, including 
local governments, international organizations, academics, researchers, 
nongovernmental organizations, civil society, and financiers. The aim of this 
report is to share objective waste management data and trends, as well as 
good and unique international practices, with the hope of improving waste 
management globally and enabling the optimal use of limited resources. 
The world generates 2.01 billion tonnes of municipal solid waste1 annually, 
with at least 33 percent of that—extremely conservatively—not managed 
in an environmentally safe manner. Worldwide, waste generated per 
person per day averages 0.74 kilogram but ranges widely, from 0.11 to 
4.54 kilograms. Though they only account for 16 percent of the world’s 
population, high-income countries generate about 34 percent, or 683 million 
tonnes, of the world’s waste. 
When looking forward, global waste is expected to grow to 3.40 billion 
tonnes by 2050. There is generally a positive correlation between waste 
generation and income level. Daily per capita waste generation in highincome 
countries is projected to increase by 19 percent by 2050, compared 
to low- and middle-income countries where it is anticipated to increase by 
approximately 40 percent or more. Waste generation was generally found 
to increase at a faster rate for incremental income changes at lower income 
levels than at high income levels. The total quantity of waste generated in 
low-income countries is expected to increase by more than three times by 
2050. The East Asia and Pacific region is generating most of the world’s 
Photo 1.1 Plastic Waste at the Thilafushi Waste Disposal Site, Maldives



4

waste, at 23 percent, and the Middle East and North Africa region is producing 
the least in absolute terms, at 6 percent. However, the fastest growing 
regions are Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and the Middle East and 
North Africa where, by 2050, total waste generation is expected to nearly 
triple, double, and double, respectively. In these regions, more than half of 
waste is currently openly dumped, and the trajectories of waste growth 
will have vast implications for the environment, health, and prosperity, 
thus requiring urgent action. 
Waste collection is a critical step in managing waste, yet rates vary 
largely by income levels, with upper-middle- and high-income countries 
providing nearly universal waste collection. Low-income countries collect 
about 48 percent of waste in cities, but this proportion drops drastically to 
26 percent outside of urban areas. Across regions, Sub-Saharan Africa collects 
about 44 percent of waste while Europe and Central Asia and North 
America collect at least 90 percent of waste. 
Waste composition differs across income levels, reflecting varied patterns 
of consumption. High-income countries generate relatively less food and 
green waste, at 32 percent of total waste, and generate more dry waste that 
could be recycled, including plastic, paper, cardboard, metal, and glass, which 
account for 51 percent of waste. Middle- and low-income countries generate 
53 percent and 56 percent food and green waste, respectively, with the fraction 
of organic waste increasing as economic development levels decrease. In 
low-income countries, materials that could be recycled account for only 
16 percent of the waste stream. Across regions, there is not much variety 
Photo 1.2 A Recycler Transports Waste Using a Modified Motorcycle, Bangkok, Thailand



5

within waste streams beyond those aligned with income. All regions generate 
about 50 percent or more organic waste, on average, except for Europe and 
Central Asia and North America, which generate higher portions of dry waste. 
It is a frequent misconception that technology is the solution to the problem 
of unmanaged and increasing waste. Technology is not a panacea and 
is usually only one factor to consider when managing solid waste. Countries 
that advance from open dumping and other rudimentary waste management 
methods are more likely to succeed when they select locally appropriate 
solutions. Globally, most waste is currently dumped or disposed of in 
some form of a landfill. Some 37 percent of waste is disposed of in some 
form of a landfill, 8 percent of which is disposed of in sanitary landfills with 
landfill gas collection systems. Open dumping accounts for about 33 percent 
of waste, 19 percent is recovered through recycling and composting, and 
11 percent is incinerated for final disposal. Adequate waste disposal or treatment, 
such as controlled landfills or more stringently operated facilities, is 
almost exclusively the domain of high- and upper-middle-income countries. 
Lower-income countries generally rely on open dumping; 93 percent of 
waste is dumped in low-income countries and only 2 percent in high-income 
countries. Upper-middle-income countries have the highest percentage of 
waste in landfills, at 54 percent. This rate decreases in high-income countries 
to 39 percent, with diversion of 35 percent of waste to recycling and composting 
and 22 percent to incineration. Incineration is used primarily in 
high-capacity, high-income, and land-constrained countries. 
Based on the volume of waste generated, its composition, and how it is 
managed, it is estimated that 1.6 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
equivalent greenhouse gas emissions were generated from solid waste treatment 
and disposal in 2016, driven primarily by open dumping and disposal in 
landfills without landfill gas capture systems. This is about 5 percent of global 
emissions.2 Solid waste–related emissions are anticipated to increase to 
2.6 billion tonnes of CO2-equivalent per year by 2050 if no improvements 
are made in the sector. 
In most countries, solid waste management operations are typically a local 
responsibility, and nearly 70 percent of countries have established institutions 
with responsibility for policy development and regulatory oversight in the 
waste sector. About two-thirds of countries have created targeted legislation 
and regulations for solid waste management, though enforcement varies 
drastically. Direct central government involvement in waste service provision, 
other than regulatory oversight or fiscal transfers, is uncommon, with about 
70 percent of waste services being overseen directly by local public entities. At 
least half of services, from primary waste collection through treatment and 
disposal, are operated by public entities and about one-third involve a publicprivate 
partnership. However, successful partnerships with the private sector 
for financing and operations tend to succeed only under certain conditions 
with appropriate incentive structures and enforcement mechanisms, and 
therefore they are not always the ideal solution. 



6

Financing solid waste management systems is a significant challenge, 
even more so for ongoing operational costs than for capital investments, 
and operational costs need to be taken into account upfront. In high-income 
countries, operating costs for integrated waste management, including collection, 
transport, treatment, and disposal, generally exceed $100 per 
tonne. Lower-income countries spend less on waste operations in absolute 
terms, with costs of about $35 per tonne and sometimes higher, but these 
countries experience much more difficulty in recovering costs. Waste management 
is labor intensive and costs of transportation alone are in the range 
of $20–$50 per tonne. Cost recovery for waste services differs drastically 
across income levels. User fees range from an average of $35 per year in 
low-income countries to $170 per year in high-income countries, with full 
or nearly full cost recovery being largely limited to high-income countries. 
User fee models may be fixed or variable based on the type of user being 
billed. Typically, local governments cover about 50 percent of investment 
costs for waste systems, and the remainder comes mainly from national 
government subsidies and the private sector. 
The solid waste data presented in this report tell the story of global, 
regional, and urban trends. The book presents analyses and case studies in 
the following chapters: 
- Chapter 2: At a Glance: A Global Picture of Solid Waste Management. 
Chapter 2 provides an overview of global solid waste management 
trends related to waste generation, composition, collection, and 
disposal. 
- Chapter 3: Regional Snapshots. Chapter 3 provides analyses of waste 
generation, composition, collection, and disposal across seven 
regions—East Asia and Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin 
America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa, South 
Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and North America. 
- Chapter 4: Waste Administration and Operations. Chapter 4 provides 
planning, administrative, operational, and contractual models for 
solid waste management. 
- Chapter 5: Financing and Cost Recovery for Waste Management 
Systems. Chapter 5 highlights typical financing methods and cost 
recovery options that are being implemented globally. 
- Chapter 6: Waste and Society. Chapter 6 provides insights into how 
climate change, technology trends, citizens, and the informal sector all 
interact with and affect the solid waste management sector. 
- Chapter 7: Case Studies. Chapter 7 details good and unique practices 
of waste management around the world, from cost recovery to coordination 
between different levels of government. 
Please refer to maps 1.1 and 1.2 for the definitions of regions and income 
levels used in this report.



7 

Map 1.1 Definition of Income Levels 



8

Map 1.2 Definition of Regions 



9


A Note on Data 

The What a Waste report compiles solid waste management data from 
various sources and publications and examines the data to provide meaningful 
trends and analyses for policy makers and researchers. For the 
purposes of this report, the definition of solid waste encompasses residential, 
commercial, and institutional waste. Industrial, medical, hazardous, 
electronic, and construction and demolition waste are reported separately 
from total national waste generation to the extent possible. Every effort 
has been undertaken to verify sources and find the most recent information 
available. 
In general, solid waste data should be considered with a degree of caution 
because of inconsistencies in definitions, data collection methodologies, 
and availability. The reliability of solid waste data is influenced by 
several factors, including undefined words or phrases; incomplete or inconsistent 
definitions; lack of dates, methodologies, or original sources; inconsistent 
or omitted units; and estimates based on assumptions. Where 
possible, actual values are presented rather than estimations or projections, 
even if that requires using older data. In addition, when a source only provides 
a range for a data point, the average of the range is used for this study 
and is noted as such. Given the variety of methodologies used by sources, 
these data are not meant to be used for ordinal ranking of countries or cities 
but rather to provide trends. 
The data reported are predominantly from 2011–17 although overall 
data span about two decades. Within a single country or city, data availability 
may cut across several years. Similarly, the year of origin for a 
specific indicator may vary across countries or cities. The year cited in 
the tables refers to the year of the data points. However, when a specific 
year is not available in the original source, the year of the publication is 
provided instead. Furthermore, when a year range is reported in the 
original source, the final year of the range is provided in this report’s 
data set. 
At a national level, this What a Waste study focuses on total waste generation 
rather than aggregated urban or rural waste generation because of 
data availability. By providing total waste generation, this study enables 
comparison across countries, income levels, and regions. To enable crosscomparability 
of data, all national waste generation statistics are adjusted 
to a common year using the methodology discussed in box 2.1., with original 
figures provided in appendix A. However, because urban data are essential 
for decision making and benchmarking, this study also reports data and 
trends from 367 cities. 
To further maximize cross-comparability of data, statistics for waste 
composition, collection rates, and disposal methods are consistently 
reported as percentages in this report. Therefore, data reported by weight 
or population in the original sources have been converted to percentages 
wherever possible, and modifications are noted in the comments. 



10

An overview of the methods used for several core indicators is as 
follows: 
Solid Waste Generation 
- Data on waste generation at the country level are available for 215 
countries and economies. 
- Sources reported solid waste data in multiple ways, including total 
waste generation for the country, daily waste generation rates for the 
country, and per capita waste generation rates for the whole country 
or urban areas only. 
- In rare cases in which national waste generation data were not available, 
total waste generation was estimated. Rural solid waste generation rates 
were estimated to be half that of an aggregate urban rate or that of one or 
more representative cities. The estimate of one-half as a rural-urban waste 
generation ratio is supported by several studies and is a conservative estimate 
that falls below trends observed in available data across regions 
(Karak, Bhagat, and Bhattacharyya 2012; GIZ and SWEEP-Net, various 
years). Total waste generation for the whole country was calculated by 
multiplying waste generation rates by urban and rural populations, using 
World Bank population data. This methodology mainly applied to 
31 countries in the Sub-Saharan Africa region and 8 countries in other 
regions. The methodology followed for the Sub-Saharan Africa region is 
explained in box 1.1. Appendix A indicates whether a national waste 
generation figure was directly reported or was estimated. 
Box 1.1 Data for the Sub-Saharan Africa Region
The Sub-Saharan Africa region generates a significant amount of solid waste, and this amount is 
expected to increase at a higher rate than for any other region given the high rate of urbanization and 
population growth in the coming decades (Hoornweg and Freire 2013). Although data availability is 
increasing significantly, statistics on waste generation, collection, treatment, and disposal in the 
region are currently relatively limited. The data that are available can follow varied definitions, methodologies, 
and collection methods, and span 23 years from 1993 to 2016. 
Given the significance of Sub-Saharan Africa for solid waste generation in the future and the recognition 
of solid waste management as a priority by many national governments, this report provides 
estimates for waste generation for many African countries for which country-level data are not 
available. 
To develop data-driven estimates, city-level data were used to extrapolate waste generation to the 
country level. Out of 48 countries in the Sub-Saharan Africa region, data were available at the country 
level for 13, or slightly more than a quarter of the total. For 31 countries (about 65 percent), one or 
more city waste generation rates, typically including the capital city, were used to estimate waste 
generation for the whole country. The city waste generation rate was used as a proxy rate for the 
urban population in the country. Half of the urban waste generation rate was used as an estimate for 
rural waste generation. For the remaining four countries for which no city-level data were available, 
an average waste generation rate for Africa was used as a proxy for the total amount generated for 
the country using national population. 



11 

- In this report, all figures shown use national waste generation statistics 
that are adjusted to a common base year of 2016, for crosscomparability. 
This analysis was conducted using the World Bank’s 
World Development Indicators’ gross domestic product (GDP) per 
capita, PPP data (constant 2011 international $) in conjunction with 
United Nations population statistics (UN 2017). National waste generation 
rates for 2016 are estimated using a projection model that is 
further detailed in box 2.1. All original numbers are provided in 
appendix A. 
- Solid waste generation can be estimated or measured at various places, 
including at the generation source, point of collection, or disposal site, 
which may affect the amount of waste reported by sources. This report 
cites the most reliable measurements available. 
Solid Waste Composition 
- Waste composition refers to the components of the waste stream as a 
percentage of the total mass generated. 
- In a few cases, composition values do not add up to 100 percent or 
sum to more than 100 percent when data are cited from multiple 
sources. Data values provided are as reported in the original source. 
- In summary statistics, food, yard, and green waste are combined into 
one category as food and green waste. 
Waste Collection Coverage 
- Waste collection coverage data are reported according to multiple 
definitions: amount of waste collected, number of households served, 
population served, or geographic area covered. This report analyzes 
the type of collection coverage reported for countries and cities. 
If multiple values were reported, the maximum collection rate was 
used to represent the national or urban collection rate in summary 
statistics. 
- Waste collection coverage is reported at the country level as well as for 
urban and rural areas, where data are available. 
Waste Treatment and Disposal 
- Waste treatment and disposal includes recycling, composting, anaerobic 
digestion, incineration, landfilling, open dumping, and dumping 
in marine areas or waterways. Given the variability of types of landfills 
used, data were collected for three types of landfills: sanitary 
landfills with landfill gas collection systems, controlled landfills that 
are engineered but for which landfill gas collection systems do not 
exist or are unknown, and uncategorized landfills. In summary statistics, 
all landfills are reported together but detailed data are provided 
in appendix B. 



12

- In cases where disposal and treatment percentages do not add up to 
100 percent or where a portion of waste is uncollected, the remaining 
amount is categorized as waste “unaccounted for.” The analyses, 
figures, and tables in this report assume that waste not accounted for 
by formal disposal methods, such as landfills or recycling, is dumped. 
Waste that is disposed of in waterways and that is managed in lowand 
middle-income countries in “other” manners is also assumed to be 
dumped. Breakdowns are available in appendix B. 
Municipal Waste Management Financials 
- Financial data are collected over a range of years, and accounting 
practices may vary by location. 
- Financial data were collected in local currencies when possible, converted 
to U.S. dollars based on the annual average exchange rate normalized 
by purchasing power parity, and adjusted to 2011 using the 
consumer price index to account for potential differences in inflation 
and to ensure cross-comparability. 
- Financial information for solid waste systems was the most scarce 
among all data categories. When the number of observations was limited, 
data were aggregated at an income level rather than by regions, 
and only metrics with substantial geographic diversity were used for 
summary statistics. 
This edition of What a Waste features the results of the most extensive 
combined national and urban solid waste management data collection 
effort to date. The current data collection and verification effort was 
designed to revise and enhance a previous effort in 2012 by expanding 
national and urban data collection, increasing the scope of metrics included, 
and providing support to decision makers by sharing good practices and 
trends globally. 
Data for this report were collected through a joint effort by regional 
experts who consulted local specialists and public agencies, sources in 
diverse languages, and active waste management facilities. Data were gathered 
from documents published by local and national governments, international 
organizations, multilateral and bilateral agencies, journals, books, 
websites, and news agencies. Data collection primarily took place during 
2017. Additionally, regional World Bank solid waste experts provided 
insights beyond the data collected. These assertions are included in the 
regional snapshots to provide further context for each region but are not 
attributed to each expert. 
The report aggregates extensive solid waste statistics at the national, 
urban, and rural levels. The current edition estimates and projects waste 
generation to 2030 and 2050, taking both urban and rural areas into 
account. Beyond the core data metrics already detailed, the report provides 
information on waste management costs, revenues, and tariffs; 



13

special waste; regulations; public communication; administrative and 
operational models; and the informal sector. In addition to nationallevel 
data for 217 countries and economies, a large amount of data were 
collected at the city level, for about one to two cities per country 
or economy. 
The most up-to-date data can be accessed through the What a Waste 
website at www.worldbank.org/what-a-waste. 



17 





CHAPTER 2 
At a Glance: A Global Picture of Solid Waste Management

Key Insights 
- The world generates 0.74 kilogram of waste per capita per day, yet national 
waste generation rates fluctuate widely from 0.11 to 4.54 kilograms per 
capita per day. Waste generation volumes are generally correlated with 
income levels and urbanization rates. 
- An estimated 2.01 billion tonnes of municipal solid waste were generated 
in 2016, and this number is expected to grow to 3.40 billion tonnes by 
2050 under a business-as-usual scenario. 
- The total quantity of waste generated in low-income countries is expected 
to increase by more than three times by 2050. Currently, the East Asia and 
Pacific region is generating most of the world’s waste, at 23 percent, and 
the Middle East and North Africa region is producing the least in absolute 
terms, at 6 percent. However, waste is growing the fastest in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, South Asia, and the Middle East North Africa regions, where, by 
2050, total waste generated is expected to approximately triple, double, 
and double, respectively. 
- Food and green waste comprise more than 50 percent of waste in low- and 
middle-income countries. In high-income countries the amount of organic 
waste is comparable in absolute terms but, because of larger amounts of 
packaging waste and other nonorganic waste, the fraction of organics is 
about 32 percent. 
- Recyclables make up a substantial fraction of waste streams, ranging from 
16 percent paper, cardboard, plastic, metal, and glass in low-income countries 
to about 50 percent in high-income countries. As countries rise in 
income level, the quantity of recyclables in the waste stream increases, 
with paper increasing most significantly.



18


Waste Generation 

Waste generation is a natural product of urbanization, economic development, 
and population growth. As nations and cities become more 
populated and prosperous, offer more products and services to citizens, and 
participate in global trade and exchange, they face corresponding amounts 
of waste to manage through treatment and disposal (map 2.1). 
The 2012 edition of What a Waste: A Global Review of Solid Waste 
Management estimated global waste production to be 1.3 billion tonnes per 
year based on available data (Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata 2012). In recent 
years, waste production has grown at levels consistent with initial projections, 
and data tracking and reporting have improved substantially. Based 
on the latest data available, global waste generation in 2016 was estimated 
to have reached 2.01 billion tonnes. 
Countries in the East Asia and Pacific and the Europe and Central Asia 
regions account for 43 percent of the world’s waste by magnitude ( figure 2.1, 
panel a). The Middle East and North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa regions 
produce the least amount of waste, together accounting for 15 percent of the 
world’s waste. East Asia and Pacific generates the most in absolute terms, an 
estimated 468 million tonnes in 2016, and the Middle East and North Africa 
region generates the least, at 129 million tonnes (figure 2.1, panel b). 
- More than one-third of waste in high-income countries is recovered 
through recycling and composting. 
- Waste collection rates vary widely by income levels. High- and upper-middleincome 
countries typically provide universal waste collection. Low-income 
countries tend to collect about 48 percent of waste in cities, but outside 
of urban areas waste collection coverage is about 26 percent. In middleincome 
countries, rural waste collection coverage varies from 33 percent to 
45 percent. 
- Globally, about 37 percent of waste is disposed of in some type of landfill, 
33 percent is openly dumped, 19 percent undergoes materials recovery 
through recycling and composting, and 11 percent is treated through modern 
incineration. 
- Adequate waste disposal or treatment using controlled landfills or more 
stringently operated facilities is almost exclusively the domain of highand 
upper-middle-income countries. Lower-income countries generally 
rely on open dumping—93 percent of waste is dumped in low-income 
countries and only 2 percent in high-income countries. 
- Upper-middle-income countries practice the highest percentage of landfilling, 
at 54 percent. This rate decreases in high-income countries to 
39 percent, where 35 percent of waste is diverted to recycling and composting 
and 22 percent to incineration.



19

Figure 2.1 Waste Generation by Region 
Map 2.1 Waste Generation Per Capita 



20

Although they only account for 16 percent of the world’s population, 
high-income countries generate 34 percent, or 683 million tonnes, of the 
world’s waste (figure 2.2). Low-income countries account for 9 percent of 
the world’s population but generate only about 5 percent of global waste, 
or 93 million tonnes. 
The three countries in the North America region—Bermuda, Canada, and 
the United States—produce the highest average amount of waste per capita, 
at 2.21 kilograms per day. All three countries are high-income nations. The 
three regions with a high proportion of low- and middle-income nations generate 
the lowest amount of waste per capita: Sub-Saharan Africa averages 
0.46 kilogram per day, South Asia 0.52 kilogram per day, and East Asia and 
Pacific 0.56 kilogram per day. Overall, the estimated global average for 2016 
is 0.74 kilogram of waste per capita per day and total generation of solid 
waste is about 2.01 billion tonnes. 
Average waste generation across countries varies substantially, from 0.11 
kilogram per capita per day to 4.54 kilograms per capita per day (table 2.1). 
Waste generation has an overall positive relationship with economic 
development (figure 2.3). For incremental income changes, waste generation 
is generally shown to increase at a faster rate at lower income levels 
Figure 2.1 Waste Generation by Region (continued)



21

Figure 2.2 Waste Generation by Income Level 
than at higher income levels. However, at the lowest income levels, waste 
generation per capita declines initially with income growth. The slower 
growth of waste generation at higher income levels could be due to reduced 
marginal demand for consumption, and therefore reduced waste. 
Waste generation also increases with urbanization (figure 2.4). Highincome 
countries and economies are more urbanized and they generate 
more waste per capita and in total. At a regional level, North America, with 



22

Table 2.1 Ranges of Average National Waste Generation by Region 
Figure 2.3 Waste Generation and Gross Domestic Product 



23

Figure 2.3 Waste Generation and Gross Domestic Product (continued)
Figure 2.4 Waste Generation and Urbanization Rate 



24

Figure 2.4 Waste Generation and Urbanization Rate (continued) 
the highest urbanization rate at 82 percent, generates 2.21 kilograms per 
capita per day, while Sub-Saharan Africa generates 0.46 kilogram per 
capita per day at a 38 percent urbanization rate. 


Projected Waste Generation 

By 2030, the world is expected to generate 2.59 billion tonnes of waste 
annually (figure 2.5). By 2050, waste generation across the world is 
expected to reach 3.40 billion tonnes (see methodology in box 2.1).



25 

Figure 2.5 Projected Global Waste Generation 
Box 2.1 Waste Generation Projection Methodology 
To ensure cross-comparability of waste generation data and to develop projections for global waste 
generation, available waste generation data were adjusted from a variety of origin years to 2016, 
2030, and 2050. 
Key Assumptions 
This analysis assumes that waste generation grows primarily based on two factors: 
- Gross domestic product (GDP) growth: As a country advances economically, its per capita waste 
generation rates increase. Economic growth is reflected using GDP per capita, with a purchasing 
power parity adjustment to 2011 to allow for comparison across countries. 
- Population growth: As a country’s population grows, amounts of total waste generated rise 
accordingly. 
Methodology Overview 
The model uses the World Bank’s World Development Indicator’s GDP per capita, PPP (constant 
2011 international $) for the waste per capita regression model, the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) GDP per capita projections, PPP (constant 2005 international 
$) for the waste per capita projection estimates, and the United Nations (UN) population growth rates 
to calculate future waste production: 
- Relationship between GDP growth and waste generation rates: The observed relationship between 
GDP growth and waste generation is reflected in figure B2.1.1. A regression model was used to 
capture the relationship between GDP per capita and waste generation per capita. The model was 
developed using country-level baseline waste generation data from the data collected and GDP per 
capita data from the associated year. In the model of best fit, the natural logarithm of GDP per capita 
is the independent variable and tonnes of waste generation per capita is the dependent variable. 
- Proxy waste generation rates: The regression model was used to estimate the expected growth 
in each country’s waste generation rate based on the growth in that country’s GDP per capita. 
Using the regression model coefficient and intercept, as well as GDP per capita data for the 
(Box continues on next page)



26

base year and for the projection years, proxy waste generation rates per year were modeled 
for each country for the base and target years, per equation B2.1.1. 
Proxy waste generation per capita 
= 1647.41 – 419.73 ln(GDP per capita) + 29.43 In(GDP per capita)2 (B2.1.1) 
- Projected waste generation: The change in proxy waste generation rates developed through the 
model was used as the growth rate for waste generation for that country. This growth rate was 
applied to the actual baseline waste generation per capita rate from the data collected to adjust 
actual waste generation rates from the base year to 2016, 2030, and 2035, per equation B2.1.2. 
If a growth rate could not be calculated for an economy or territory because of a lack of GDP data, 
a regional average was used. 
Projected Waste Generation Rate Target Year = (Proxy Waste Generation Rate Target Year / 
Proxy Waste Generation Rate Base Year ) í 
Actual Waste Generation Rate Base Year (B2.1.2) 
- 2016 waste generation: The adjusted per capita waste generation rate for 2016 was multiplied by 
the historical population level for 2016. If waste generation data were already reported for 2016, 
the original data were used. 
- 2030 and 2050 waste generation: The adjusted per capita waste generation rates for 2030 and 
2050 were multiplied by the respective projected population levels for the target year. 
In adjusting and projecting waste generation, urbanization rates and changes in country income 
classification are not considered. 
Data Sources 
- Waste Generation: Best available national waste generation data from current study 
- Base Year and 2016 Population: World Bank Open Data 
- 2030 and 2050 Population: UN Population Projections, Medium Variant, 2017 Revision 
- GDP per Capita, PPP (constant 2011 international $): World Bank’s World Development Indicators 
- GDP per Capita, PPP (constant 2005 international $): OECD 
Box 2.1 Waste Generation Projection Methodology (continued) 
Figure B2.1.1 Waste Generation: Actual and Model Prediction



27

Figure 2.6 Projected Waste Generation by Income Group 
High-income countries are expected to experience the least amount 
of waste generation growth by 2030, given that they have reached a 
point of economic development at which materials consumption is less 
linked to gross domestic product growth (figure 2.6, panel a).1 Lowincome 
countries are positioned for the greatest amount of growth in 
economic activity as well as population, and waste levels are expected 
to more than triple by 2050. At a per capita level, trends are similar in 
that the largest growth in waste generation is expected in low and 
middle-income countries ( figure 2.6, panel b).



28

Since waste generation is generally expected to increase with economic 
development and population growth, regions with high proportions of 
growing low-income and lower-middle-income countries are anticipated 
to experience the greatest increase in waste production. In particular, the 
Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia regions are expected to see waste 
levels approximately triple and double, respectively, in the next three 
decades with economic growth and urbanization (figure 2.7). Regions 
with higher-income countries, such as North America and Europe and 
Central Asia, are expected to see waste levels rise more gradually. 
Figure 2.7 Projected Waste Generation by Region 



29

Figure 2.8 Global Waste Composition 


Waste Composition 

Waste composition is the categorization of types of materials in municipal 
solid waste. Waste composition is generally determined through a 
standard waste audit, in which samples of garbage are taken from generators 
or final disposal sites, sorted into predefined categories, and 
weighed. 
At an international level, the largest waste category is food and green 
waste, making up 44 percent of global waste (figure 2.8). Dry recyclables 
(plastic, paper and cardboard, metal, and glass) amount to another 
38 percent of waste. 
Waste composition varies considerably by income level (figure 2.9). The 
percentage of organic matter in waste decreases as income levels rise. 
Consumed goods in higher-income countries include more materials such 
as paper and plastic than they do in lower-income countries. The granularity 
of data for waste composition, such as detailed accounts of rubber and 
wood waste, also increases by income level. 
Global food loss and waste accounts for a significant proportion of food 
and green waste and is discussed further in box 2.2.



30

Figure 2.9 Waste Composition by Income Level 
Box 2.2 Global Food Loss and Waste 
Across global food systems, food loss and waste (food loss and waste) is a widespread issue, posing a challenge 
to food security, food safety, the economy, and environmental sustainability. No accurate 
estimates of the extent of food loss and waste are available, but studies indicate that food loss and waste is roughly 30 percent 
of all food globally (FAO 2015). This amounts to 1.3 billion tonnes per year. food loss and waste represents wastage 
of resources, including the land, water, labor, and energy used to produce food. It strongly 
contributes to climate change because greenhouse gases are emitted during food production 
and distribution activities, and methane is released during the decay of wasted food. food loss and waste also 
affects food supply chains by lowering income for food producers, increasing costs for food 
(Box continues on next page)



31

Box 2.2 Global Food Loss and Waste (continued) 
consumers, and reducing access to food. Minimizing food loss and waste could lead to substantial food security 
and environmental gains. 
The causes of food loss and waste vary across the world and depend on specific local conditions. Typically, 
food loss and waste in low-income countries occurs at the production, postharvest handling, storage, and processing 
stages and is caused predominantly by managerial and technical limitations. food loss and waste 
mostly occurs in the distribution and consumption stages in middle- and high-income countries, 
although it can happen in earlier stages such as when agricultural subsidies lead to overproduction 
of farm crops. These challenges relate to consumer behavior and government 
policies and regulation. 
Improving coordination among actors along the different stages of the supply chain could 
address some of the food loss and waste issues globally. Measures to reduce food loss and waste in low-income countries 
could involve investment in infrastructure and transportation, including in technology for storage 
and cooling. Small-scale farmers could also be supported by provision of improved financing and 
credit to allow them to diversify or scale their production. In high-income countries, consumer 
education for behavior change is key to decreasing food loss and waste. In addition to decreasing food loss and waste along the 
supply chain, discarded food could also be managed productively for composting and energy 
recovery. 
Regional and international stakeholders are taking action to address food loss and waste. The African Union is 
working with 14 governments to translate the “Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural 
Growth and Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods,” including food loss 
reduction, into proper national policy and strategies in Africa (African Union Commission 2014). The 
Deputy-Secretary General of the United Nations called on all partners to adopt a more holistic 
approach to food security, one that prioritizes food loss and waste, builds new coalitions, scales up current work, 
and innovates (Helvetas 2018). The Food and Agriculture Organization has been working on developing 
new metrics and methodologies to measure food loss and waste, and the organization’s SAVE FOOD Initiative 
works with civil society to address the issue (FAO 2018). The World Food Programme is including 
food loss as part of some five-year country plans in Africa and launched the Farm to Market Alliance 
to structure local markets and promote loss reduction technologies among smallholder farmers 
(World Food Program 2017). The World Bank is tackling the issue through loans, such as in Argentina, 
and by coordinated food waste management and the establishment of a cross-sectoral strategy 
(World Bank 2015). 
Several national and local governments have also taken action. In 2016, the government of Italy 
approved a law to enhance collaboration among key stakeholders, educate the public, encourage 
food donations from business through financial incentives, and promote reusable and recyclable 
packaging (Azzuro, Gaiani, and Vittuari 2016). In 2016, France became the first country in the world 
to ban supermarkets from throwing away or destroying unsold food, forcing them instead to donate 
it to charities and food banks (Chrisafis 2016). In 2009, the city of San Francisco in the United States 
passed an ordinance requiring all residents and tourists to compost food waste (McClellan 2017). 
The city of Ningbo in China diverts food waste from apartment buildings to an anaerobic digestion 
facility (Lee et al. 2014). In several cities in Sweden, biogas is produced from food waste to power 
vehicles and generate heat (Swedish Gas Centre, Swedish Gas Association, and Swedish Biogas 
Association 2008). In cities like Linköping, Sweden, the majority of public buses have been converted 
to use recovered biogas. The optimal strategy to reduce loss and recover food waste depends 
greatly on the local context, but the increasing global action reveals the many policy, technology, 
and educational avenues available. 



32


Waste Collection 

Waste collection is one of the most common services provided at a municipal 
level. Several waste collection service models are used across the 
globe. The most common form of waste collection is door-to-door 
collection. In this model, trucks or small vehicles—or, where environments 
are more constrained, handcarts or donkeys—are used to pick up 
garbage outside of households at a predetermined frequency. In certain 
localities, communities may dispose of waste in a central container or collection 
point where it is picked up by the municipality and transported to 
final disposal sites. In other areas with less regular collection, communities 
may be notified through a bell or other signal that a collection vehicle 
has arrived in the neighborhood, such as in Taiwan, China (see case study 
15 in chapter 7). 
Waste collection rates in high-income countries and in North America 
are near 100 percent (figure 2.10).2 In lower-middle-income countries, collection 
rates are about 51 percent, and in low-income countries, about 
39 percent. In low-income countries, uncollected waste is often managed 
independently by households and may be openly dumped, burned, or, 
less commonly, composted. Improvement of waste collection services is 
a critical step to reduce pollution and thereby to improve human health 
and, potentially, traffic congestion. 
Waste collection rates tend to be substantially higher for urban areas 
than for rural areas, since waste management is typically an urban service. 
In lower-middle-income countries, waste collection rates are more than 
twice as high in cities as in rural areas (figure 2.11). 
Figure 2.10 Waste Collection Rates 



33

Figure 2.10 Waste Collection Rates (continued) 
Figure 2.11 Urban and Rural Collection Rates by Income Level 



34


Waste Disposal 

Around the world, almost 40 percent of waste is disposed of in landfills 
(figure 2.12).3 About 19 percent undergoes materials recovery through 
recycling and composting,4 and 11 percent is treated through modern 
incineration. Although globally 33 percent of waste is still openly 
dumped,5 governments are increasingly recognizing the risks and costs 
of dumpsites and pursuing sustainable waste disposal methods. 
Waste disposal practices vary significantly by income level and region 
(figure 2.13). Open dumping is prevalent in lower-income countries, 
where landfills are not yet available. About 93 percent of waste is burned 
or dumped in roads, open land, or waterways in low-income countries, 
whereas only 2 percent of waste is dumped in high-income countries. 
More than two-thirds of waste is dumped in the South Asia and Sub- 
Saharan Africa regions, which will significantly impact future waste 
growth. 
As nations prosper economically, waste is managed using more sustainable 
methods. Construction and use of landfills is commonly the first step 
toward sustainable waste management. Whereas only 3 percent of waste is 
Figure 2.12 Global Waste Treatment and Disposal 



35

deposited in landfills in low-income countries, about 54 percent of waste is 
sent to landfills in upper-middle-income countries. Furthermore, wealthier 
countries tend to put greater focus on materials recovery through recycling 
and composting. In high-income countries, 29 percent of waste is recycled 
and 6 percent composted. Incineration is also more common. In highincome 
countries, 22 percent of waste is incinerated, largely within highcapacity 
and land-constrained countries and territories such as Japan and 
the British Virgin Islands. 
Figure 2.13 Disposal Methods by Income 



36


Special waste 

Municipal solid waste is one of several waste streams that countries and 
cities manage. Other common waste streams include industrial waste, 
agricultural waste, construction and demolition waste, hazardous waste, 
medical waste, and electronic waste, or e-waste (figure 2.14). 
Some waste streams, such as industrial waste, are generated in much higher 
quantities than municipal solid waste (table 2.2). For the countries with 
Figure 2.14 Global Average Special Waste Generation 
Table 2.2 Industrial and Electronic Waste Generation Rates 



37

available industrial waste generation data, the trend shows that globally, industrial 
waste generation is almost 18 times greater than municipal solid waste. 
Generation of industrial waste rises significantly as income level increases. 
Global agricultural waste production is more than four and a half times 
that of municipal solid waste. Agricultural waste is most significant in countries 
with large farming industries. Agricultural waste is often managed 
separately from other waste streams since it is largely organic and may serve 
as a useful input for future agricultural activities. 
Construction and demolition waste may compete with municipal solid 
waste for disposal space in landfills. In some countries, such as India, it is 
common to dispose of both in the same disposal facilities. 
Hazardous, medical, and e-waste are typically only a fraction of 
municipal solid waste. If disposed of properly, these waste are typically 
treated in specialized facilities, including chemical processing plants, 
incinerators, and disassembly centers, respectively. The generation of 
e-waste is associated with economic development, with high-income 
countries generating five times the volume of e-waste generated by lowermiddle-
income countries. The increasing amount of e-waste and its 
potential for environmental pollution and recycling may be an area of 
consideration for rapidly developing countries.



39





CHAPTER 3 
Regional Snapshots 


East Asia and Pacific 

Key Insights 
- The East Asia and Pacific region generated the most waste globally at 
468 million tonnes in 2016, an average of 0.56 kilogram per capita per day. 
- Some 53 percent of waste in East Asia and Pacific is composed of food and 
green waste, and dry recyclables comprise about one-third of the waste. 
- Waste collection coverage in East Asia and Pacific is about 77 percent at an 
urban level, 45 percent at a rural level, and 71 percent overall. 
- About 46 percent of garbage is disposed of in some form of landfill; 24 percent 
of waste is incinerated, mainly in high-income countries; and about 9 percent 
of waste is recycled. 
- Cities are increasingly developing source-separation and recycling programs 
for both dry materials and organics.
Background and Trends 
The East Asia and Pacific region consists of 37 countries and economies 
on the main Asian continent, Australia, and surrounding island states 
in the Pacific Ocean. The region was home to a population of 2.27 billion 
in 2016. Disposal practices vary in East Asia and Pacific. Although open 
dumping remains a common disposal practice, higher-income countries 
such as China and the Republic of Korea have achieved high landfilling and 
recycling rates. Because of increasingly rigorous environmental laws, disposal 
practices are making the transition to sanitary landfills. Island states 



40

in the Pacific are especially focused on materials recovery through recycling 
and composting. 
From an administrative perspective, waste systems are increasingly 
becoming privatized in municipalities, and cities are developing structures 
for accountability and quality. Governing agencies are exploring ways to 
reduce overlaps in responsibility. Financially, waste systems are heavily 
subsidized by the government, and countries with unplanned settlements, 
such as Mongolia, still experience difficulty recovering costs. However, 
fee-recovery systems are maturing. For example, several countries charge 
waste management user fees through combined utility bills, and the use of 
behavior-changing variable fees is famously practiced in Korea, as well as 
in several other countries, including the Philippines and Thailand. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
The East Asia and Pacific region generated 468 million tonnes of waste 
in 2016, at an average rate of 0.56 kilogram per person per day 
(figure 3.1). The largest waste generators are typically high-income countries 
or island states. About 47 percent of waste in the region is generated 
by the economic hub of China, which is home to 61 percent of the 
region’s population. However, at 0.43 kilogram, China’s daily per capita 
waste generation rate is below the regional average, reflecting the lower 
amounts of waste generated by the country’s significant rural population. 
Figure 3.1 Waste Generation Rates: East Asia and Pacific Region 



41

Average waste generation in East Asia and Pacific’s urban areas is 
substantially higher than national averages, at 0.96 kilogram per capita 
per day. 
The majority of waste in the East Asia and Pacific region is organic 
(figure 3.2). Dry recyclables comprise one-third of waste. Many initiatives 
have emerged to recover usable materials from waste in the East Asia and 
Pacific region. 
Waste Collection 
At a national level, waste collection coverage in East Asia and Pacific averages 
about 71 percent (figure 3.3). Rates are highest in urban areas, at about 
77 percent, and lower in rural communities at 45 percent. High-income 
countries and economies, such as Singapore; Hong Kong SAR, China; 
Japan; and Korea collect almost 100 percent of waste (figure 3.4). Where 
services exist in East Asia and Pacific, the majority of waste is collected on 
a door-to-door basis (in 18 out of 25 countries studied). 
The informal sector is active in the region, with up to an estimated 
200,000 active waste pickers in Beijing, China, and 16,000 in Ho Chi Minh 
City, Vietnam (Li 2015; CCAC, n.d.). Waste picker services are formalized 
in certain cities. For example, as part of the rehabilitation of the Baruni 
Figure 3.2 Waste Composition in East Asia and Pacific 



42

Disposal Facility in the capital of Papua New Guinea, waste-picking activities 
have been regulated. In Port Vila, the capital of Vanuatu, waste pickers 
must register at the disposal facility to collect waste. 
Within the East Asia and Pacific cities studied, source separation is commonly 
practiced (figure 3.5). The most commonly source-separated materials 
are paper and cardboard, cans and metals, plastics and packaging, and 
glass. 
Waste Transportation 
The distance traveled between city centers and final disposal sites ranges 
from 6 kilometers in Honiara, Solomon Islands, to 64 kilometers in Seoul, 
Korea. Waste transportation distances can be higher for cities with dense 
suburban populations and limited access to land outside urban centers. 
Waste Disposal 
In East Asia and Pacific, 46 percent of waste is disposed of in landfills 
(figure 3.6). Notably, slightly more than one-fifth of waste is incinerated in 
modern facilities. Incineration is typically practiced by high-income 
countries and economies with limited land availability, such as Japan 
(80 percent); Taiwan, China (64 percent); Singapore (37 percent); and 
Korea (25 percent), but has also become common practice in China 
(30 percent). Open dumping is relatively uncommon compared with other 
Figure 3.3 Waste Collection Coverage in East Asia and Pacific 



43

Photo 3.1 Landfill in China 
Photo 3.2 A Waste and Street Cleaning Worker in Hoi An, Vietnam



44

Figure 3.4 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in East Asia and Pacific percent coverage 
regions, potentially because of the advanced waste practices of highly 
populous, high-income economies within the region. 
Many cities practice recycling to some extent. In East Asia and Pacific, 
23 out of 28 cities with reported data recycle some amount of waste. 
Composting is developing as a practice in high-income or densely populated 
cities such as Wellington, New Zealand; Bangkok, Thailand; and 
Seoul, Korea. 



45

Figure 3.5 Number of Cities in East Asia and Pacific Source Separating Recoverable 
Figure 3.6 Waste Disposal and Treatment in East Asia and Pacific 



46


Europe and Central Asia 

Key Insights 
- Europe and Central Asia generated 392 million tonnes of waste in 2016, or 
1.18 kilograms per capita per day. 
- Waste collection rates in the region average 90 percent. The average urban 
collection rate is 96 percent, and the average rural rate is 55 percent. 
- About three-quarters of waste in Europe and Central Asia has the potential 
to be recovered through recycling or organics management. Currently, 
31 percent of waste materials are recovered through recycling and 
composting. 
- Incineration is used to process 18 percent of waste across Europe and Central 
Asia, though the practice has mainly been adopted in Western European 
countries. 
- Because of greater economic development and stringent European Union 
legislation, many of the higher recycling and collection rates in Europe and 
Central Asia occur in Western Europe. 
- The focus in Europe and Central Asia is typically on improvement of waste 
collection systems, construction of central disposal sites, and closure of 
dumpsites.
Background and Trends 
The Europe and Central Asia region includes 57 countries spanning 
Greenland in the west to the Russian Federation in the east. The region 
housed 912 million people in 2016. Waste prevention and recycling are 
increasing in the region. In European Union member states in 
Western Europe, targets for waste disposal and recycling are guided by 
legislation. To fulfill their membership requirements, new European 
Union member states are focused on increasing rates of waste diversion 
from landfills and are taking measures to achieve a 100 percent rate of 
sanitary waste disposal, if not achieved already. Much of the fastest 
growth in modernization of waste management systems is occurring in 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia, where governments are largely 
focused on closing old dumpsites and building centralized facilities for 
treatment and disposal. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
The Europe and Central Asia region generated 392 million tonnes of waste 
in 2016, or 1.18 kilograms per person each day (figure 3.7). The highest 
per capita waste generators are found in a few island states with high levels 
of tourism and in the economic hubs in Western Europe. The countries 



47

Figure 3.7 Waste Generation Rates: Europe and Central Asia 
Figure 3.8 Waste Composition in Europe and Central Asia 



48

Figure 3.9 Waste Collection Coverage in Europe and Central Asia 
generating the least waste are largely in Eastern Europe or Central Asia 
and typically have a lower gross domestic product per capita. Urban areas 
generated 1.28 kilograms of waste per capita per day. However, in many 
countries in the region, per capita waste generation levels hardly differ 
between urban and rural areas. 
Waste in the Europe and Central Asia region is mostly organic, as is 
consistent with global trends (figure 3.8). The region is only exceeded in its 
generation of solid recyclables, such as paper and plastic, by North America. 
In urban areas, waste composition is similar to national waste composition, 
with a slightly lower proportion of organic waste. 
Waste Collection 
Nationally, waste collection coverage is relatively high, at 90 percent 
(figure 3.9). The urban waste collection coverage rate of 96 percent 
exceeds the rural waste collection rate of 55 percent. In many European 
cities waste collection has been modernized with comprehensive truck 
fleets and planned systems (figure 3.10); in rural areas, however, waste 
collection systems are still in development. 
In urban areas in Europe and Central Asia, waste collection typically 
takes place through a mix of door-to-door curbside collection and dropoffs 
at centralized bins. 



49

Figure 3.10 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in Europe and Central Asia 



50

Figure 3.11 Number of Cities in Europe and Central Asia Source Separating Recoverable Waste Streams 
Out of the 45 cities in the study that reported some type of source 
separation, the streams of waste that are most commonly source separated 
are paper and cardboard, plastics and packaging, and glass 
(figure 3.11). 
Waste Transportation 
In cities in Europe and Central Asia, the distance that waste is transported 
between main city centers and landfills ranges considerably, from 
2 to 51 kilometers. Of 22 cities with reported data, 10 aggregate waste 
at a central transfer station or collection point before final disposal in 
landfills. 
Waste Disposal 
In Europe and Central Asia, one-quarter of waste is disposed of in some 
type of landfill (figure 3.12). Incineration, which accounts for 18 percent 
of waste disposal, is largely practiced in Western European countries with 
high technological capacity, advanced environmental regulations, and 
enforcement authority. Several countries have achieved high rates of recycling 
and composting (table 3.1). 



51

Figure 3.12 Waste Disposal and Treatment in Europe and Central Asia 
Photo 3.3 Recycling Plant in Bosnia and Herzegovina



52

Table 3.1 Countries with High Recycling and Composting Rates in Europe and Central Asia 



53


Latin America and the Caribbean 

Key Insights 
- The Latin American and the Caribbean region generated 231 million tonnes of 
waste in 2016, with an average of 0.99 kilogram per capita per day. 
- Some 52 percent of municipal solid waste is classified as food and green waste. 
- Waste collection coverage for the region is relatively comprehensive at 
84 percent, on average, although average coverage for rural areas is 30 percent. 
- About 69 percent of waste is disposed of in some form of landfill, and more 
than 50 percent of waste is disposed of in sanitary landfills with environmental 
controls. 
- The region recycles 4.5 percent of waste. 
- Some countries are pursuing opportunities to recover energy from waste 
through methods such as landfill gas collection and anaerobic digestion.
Background and Trends 
The Latin America and the Caribbean region consists of 42 countries that 
include South America and the Caribbean Islands. The region had a population 
of 638 million in 2016. Solid waste systems in the region are in the 
process of modernization, though practices vary based on income level. 
At an urban level, many cities have initiated source-separation programs, 
and recycling rates are highest for materials such as aluminum, paper, and 
plastic. Recycling is common in the region except in the Caribbean islands, 
where recycling markets are nascent. 
An increasing amount of waste is being disposed of in sanitary landfills, 
with or without environmental and social controls, but a significant amount 
of waste is still dumped, burned, or used as animal feed. The stability of 
dumpsites is an issue, especially given the frequency of natural disasters in the 
Caribbean. The Caribbean is also more prone to plastic marine litter washing 
up onshore and needs to address that challenge as well. Some advanced cities 
are beginning to convert landfill gas to energy. Other cities are exploring new 
technologies such as waste-to-energy incineration and anaerobic digestion, 
with anaerobic digestion receiving particular attention. From a policy perspective, 
most countries and cities have at least one regulatory mechanism in place 
to guide waste management activities. 
Cost recovery varies across the region and includes government subsidies, 
taxes, user fees, and cross-subsidization across income levels. 
Environmental levies for littering are common, but it is not always clear 
that the funds are used for solid waste management activities. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
The Latin America and the Caribbean region generated 231 million tonnes 
of waste in 2016, at an average of 0.99 kilogram per person each day 
(figure 3.13). Many of the highest waste generators are island states with 
active tourist economies. 



54

Figure 3.13 Waste Generation Rates: Latin America and the Caribbean Region 
Figure 3.14 Waste Composition in Latin America and the Caribbean 



55

About half of the waste in the Latin America and the Caribbean 
region is food and green waste (figure 3.14). About one-third of waste is 
composed of dry recyclables. It is likely that the almost 15 percent of 
waste that has not been characterized through formal systems is largely 
organic, given that areas outside the purview of municipal waste systems 
tend to be rural or lower in income, and these areas tend to generate 
more wet or organic waste. 
Waste Collection 
Waste collection coverage is quite high for the Latin America and the 
Caribbean region compared with global trends. At an urban level, about 
85 percent of waste is collected (figure 3.15), and most waste collection 
systems in Latin America and the Caribbean are on a door-to-door 
basis. In rural communities, waste collection coverage is about 
30 percent. Collection coverage varies significantly, with coverage of 
greater than 95 percent in cities in countries such as Uruguay and 
Colombia, and as low as 12 percent in Port au Prince, Haiti (figure 
3.16). The informal sector is highly active within the region. Cities studied 
reported varying numbers of active waste pickers, ranging from 
175 in Cusco, Peru, to 20,000 in São Paolo, Brazil (Lizana 2012; CCAC, 
n.d.). Some large Latin American cities average almost 4,000 active 
waste pickers collecting recyclable materials. 
Figure 3.15 Waste Collection Coverage in Latin America and the Caribbean 



56

Waste Transportation 
The main transportation mode for waste in Latin America and the 
Caribbean is trucks. Of the 21 cities reporting waste transportation practices, 
16 aggregate waste at a transfer station or other site before final 
disposal, and most cities have transfer stations in operation, ranging from 
Figure 3.16 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in Latin America and the Caribbean 



57

1 in Cusco, Peru, to 12 in Mexico City, Mexico. Aggregation stations may 
be intended either to transfer waste to larger trucks or to increase efficiency 
of materials recovery. These stations may be formal or informal 
recycling centers where waste pickers sort materials for recycling. After 
waste is collected, the distance traveled between city centers and final disposal 
sites ranges from 4 to 62 kilometers. 
Waste Disposal 
More than two-thirds of waste in the Latin America and the Caribbean 
region is disposed of in some type of landfill (figure 3.17), although some of 
these may be well-run dumps. More than half of waste is disposed of in 
sanitary landfills with some environmental controls, reflecting a general 
regional focus on sustainable disposal methods. Open dumping accounts 
for about 27 percent of waste disposal and treatment. Recycling and composting 
systems are emerging across the region, although the extent of 
implementation varies by country. Many cities are focused on recovering 
waste; for example, cities such as Montevideo, Uruguay, and Bogotá and 
Medellín, Colombia, recycle more than 15 percent of waste. In addition, 
cities such as Mexico City, Mexico, and Rosario, Argentina, compost more 
than 10 percent of waste. Landfill gas collection has emerged as the main 
mechanism of recovering energy from waste in Latin America and the 
Caribbean. 
Photo 3.4 Plastic Bottle Collection in Jamaica



58

Figure 3.17 Waste Disposal and Treatment in Latin America and the Caribbean 



59


Middle East and North Africa 

Key Insights 
- The Middle East and North Africa region generated 129 million tonnes of 
waste in 2016, the lowest total of any region, primarily because of its lower 
population, at an average of 0.81 kilogram per capita daily. However, the 
region will double waste generation by 2050. 
- Some 53 percent of all waste is disposed of in open dumps although countries 
are seeking alternative methods to dispose of waste, especially in the 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Recycling and composting are widespread 
at a pilot scale. 
- In GCC countries, waste collection rates are nearly 100 percent, and these 
countries are exploring ways to recover value from waste through waste-toenergy 
projects. 
- Political instability in certain countries has hindered the development of formal 
waste systems in many areas. However, citizen engagement initiatives 
are strong and governments are increasingly pursuing reforms, integration 
of the private sector, and improved fee recovery. 
- Legal and institutional reform has become a common focus for many nations, 
such as Jordan, Morocco, and the GCC countries. 
Background and Trends 
The Middle East and North Africa region consists of 21 countries spanning 
Morocco in the west to the Islamic Republic of Iran in the east. The region 
was home to a population of 437 million people in 2016. Waste generation 
and management practices in the region vary widely. Countries such 
as Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait generate more than 
1.5 kilograms of waste per person per day, while countries such 
as Morocco, Djibouti, and the Republic of Yemen generate less than 
0.6 kilogram per person per day. 
Although political fragility has affected the delivery of services and 
progress of the solid waste sector in several areas, many governments 
are making efforts to address waste challenges through legal, technical, 
and institutional reforms. Strong citizen engagement initiatives and 
financial investments are underway, such as in Morocco (box 3.1), and 
several countries are working to integrate the private sector into service 
delivery and to increase fee recovery. Many high-income countries 
in the GCC are finding sustainable ways to dispose of waste, including 
through waste-to-energy projects, and several waste infrastructure 
projects are being tendered or are under construction in the region. 
Most GCC countries are also developing new regulations and institutional 
structures. 



60

Box 3.1 Morocco: Investing in Environmental Sustainability Pays Off 
A marginal endeavor only a decade ago, environmental sustainability is now 
a national priority in Morocco, as evidenced by the recently adopted National 
Strategy for Sustainable Development. Government efforts over the past 
decades toward greener growth are yielding tangible results. Between 
2008 and 2014, the government invested about 2.8 billion dirhams, or 
US$0.3 billion, to improve municipal waste management through the 
Program National de Déchets Ménagers, cutting corresponding environmental 
costs by an estimated 4.2 billion dirhams or US$0.4 billion over the 
same period. 
Source: Calculation by M. Sarraf based on Croitoru and Sarraf (2017). 
Note: Exchange rate of 9.5 dirhams per US$1 as of June 2018. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
Waste generation in the Middle East and North Africa region is relatively 
modest compared with global trends, primarily due to a lower population. 
The region generated 129 million tonnes of waste in 2016, at an average 
of 0.81 kilogram per person per day (figure 3.18). However, the waste 
generation rate in cities is significantly higher, at an average of 
1.38 kilograms per person per day. Many of the largest waste generators 
are high-income countries, mainly those in the GCC. 
Figure 3.18 Waste Generation Rates: Middle East and North Africa Region 



61

Figure 3.19 Waste Composition in the Middle East and North Africa 
Food and green waste, at 58 percent, is the predominant type of waste in 
the Middle East and North Africa (figure 3.19). About one-third of waste is 
composed of dry recyclables, and the rising recycling activity in the region 
reflects an increasing willingness to capture the value of these materials. A 
major focus in the region is on reducing food waste and addressing organic 
waste management. 
Waste Collection 
Waste collection coverage is relatively comprehensive for the Middle East 
and North Africa region. Coverage is highest in urban areas, with an average 
of 90 percent of waste being collected (figure 3.20). Many cities 
reported 100 percent collection coverage (figure 3.21). Rural coverage is 
relatively high for most countries, with an average of 74 percent of waste 
being collected, though there is significant variation between countries. In 
Qatar, 100 percent of rural waste is collected. However, in Tunisia and the 
Arab Republic of Egypt, 5 percent and 15 percent of rural waste is collected, 
respectively. The informal sector is active across the Middle East 
and North Africa region. For example, an estimated 96,000 informal 
waste pickers are active in Cairo and account for 10 percent of the waste 
collected in the city (IFC 2014). 



62

Figure 3.20 Waste Collection Coverage in the Middle East and North Africa 
Photo 3.5 One Form of Waste Collection in West Bank



63

Figure 3.21 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in the Middle East and North Africa 
Where waste collection exists in urban areas, the predominant method is 
door-to-door pickup by trucks. Source separation is not common within 
the region. 
Waste Transportation 
The distance traveled between city centers and final disposal sites ranges 
significantly, from 3 to 40 kilometers (table 3.2). It is common to aggregate 
waste at a transfer station or another site before final disposal, and 
many cities have transfer stations in operation. However, many cities studied 
stated that the number of transfer stations in operation fell short of the 
optimal number for the urban waste management system. 
Waste Disposal 
Waste disposal practices vary widely in the Middle East and North Africa 
region. Open dumping is prevalent, at 53 percent of total waste management 
(figure 3.22). For example, about 940 dumps exist in Lebanon 
for municipal waste, as well as construction and demolition waste 
(Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Environment and UNDP 2017). 
Furthermore, in high-income countries, most landfills are not engineered 
landfills and effectively operate as dumps. 



64

Table 3.2 Examples of Transfer Station Availability and Transportation Distance in the Middle East and North Africa 
However, landfill usage is rapidly increasing. For example, the percentage 
of municipal solid waste collected and disposed of in sanitary landfills 
in Morocco has increased from 10 percent in 2008 to 32 percent in 2012 
and to 53 percent in 2016, and once five new sanitary landfills that are 
currently under construction are complete, the rate is expected to reach 
80 percent (Sarraf 2018, personal communication, May 30, 2018). Many 
countries in the GCC, such as Qatar, have integrated higher recycling and 
waste-to-energy rates into national plans and have begun construction 
(Qatar General Secretariat for Development and Planning 2011). Several 
high-income GCC countries are pursuing waste-to-energy solutions and are 
planning properly designed waste management facilities, including incinerators 
and sanitary landfills. 
Recycling and composting systems are increasing in prevalence. Of the 
21 countries studied, 16 have reported some amount of recycling activities. 
The share of waste recovered is typically low, about 1–8 percent, but ranges 
up to 25 percent. Out of 21 countries, 9 have reported some level of composting 
activity. 



65

Figure 3.22 Waste Disposal and Treatment in the Middle East and North Africa 



66


North America 

Key Insights 
- The North American region generates the highest average amount of waste, at 
2.21 kilograms per capita per day; total waste generated was 289 million tonnes 
annually in 2016. 
- Waste collection coverage in North America is nearly universal, at 99.7 
percent, with the gap in collection coverage occurring in Bermuda. 
- More than 55 percent of waste is composed of recyclables including paper, 
cardboard, plastic, metal, and glass. 
- At 54 percent, more than half of waste in North America is disposed of at sanitary 
landfills and one-third of waste is recycled. 
Background and Trends 
North America is the smallest region, consisting of three countries: 
Bermuda, Canada, and the United States. The region was home to a population 
of 359 million in 2016. The United States is the largest of the three, 
with a population of 322 million, and Bermuda is the smallest with 62,000 
people. All three countries in North America are high-income nations, and 
as such, waste management and disposal practices tend to be advanced 
relative to global trends. Waste management systems generally operate in 
an environmentally sound manner, have high capacity, serve nearly all citizens, 
and enjoy more consistent financial stability and fee collection than 
systems in lower-income countries. 
Given more advanced information management systems, data availability 
and accuracy are relatively strong in North America. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
Though home to less than 5 percent of the global population in 2016, 
North America generated 14 percent of the world’s waste, at 289 million 
tonnes with a daily rate of 2. 21 kilograms per capita (figure 3.23). The 
high waste generation rate reflects the high-income status of these countries 
and related economic activity. Waste generation rates in North 
American cities vary, with cities such as Seattle in the United States generating 
up to 3.13 kilograms per capita per day and others such as Ottawa, 
Canada, generating only 0.95 kilogram per capita per day (Seattle Public 
Utilities 2016; City of Ottawa 2018). 
As an island state with high tourist activity, Bermuda is the highest waste 
generator per capita in North America. Canada generates the least amount 
of waste, though it is not far behind the United States on a per capita basis. 
The composition of waste in North America is diverse. Unlike other 
regions, food and green waste accounts for less than 30 percent of the 
total waste stream (figure 3.24). More than 55 percent of waste is dry 
recyclables. Paper and cardboard comprise 28 percent of total waste, and 
plastic 12 percent. 



67

Figure 3.23 Waste Generation Rates: North American Region 
Figure 3.24 Waste Composition in North America 
Waste Collection 
Some 99.7 percent of waste in North America is collected, with a gap only 
in Bermuda. Waste is typically collected at the curb beside residential or 
commercial establishments. Rural areas have access to formal collection 
systems, which are typically either door-to-door services or central drop-off 



68

points managed by municipalities or private entities. Local laws in many 
cities mandate that waste collection be provided to households, or that 
larger residential buildings or commercial institutions contract with private 
operators for waste collection. Collection is typically done with trucks and, 
depending on the location of the treatment or disposal facility, waste is 
often shifted to larger trucks at transfer stations or sorting facilities to more 
effectively transport the large quantities of waste over long distances. 
Waste Disposal 
Over half of waste in North America is disposed of in sanitary landfills 
(figure 3.25). One-third of waste is recycled, about 12 percent is incinerated 
in incinerators with energy recovery, and less than 1 percent is 
composted. In North America, landfills are highly regulated and waste 
is disposed of in an environmentally sound manner. U.S. landfills are regulated 
by the national Environmental Protection Agency, and municipal 
solid waste landfills must be designed with environmental controls and 
report on certain performance measures, such as methane generation, as 
well as the quality of the air, water, and soil. 
As an island nation, Bermuda faces unique land constraints. In 1994, a 
central waste-to-energy incinerator was constructed. The facility reduces 
waste volume by 90 percent and currently 67 percent of the country’s waste 
is incinerated (Government of Bermuda n.d.). 
Figure 3.25 Waste Disposal and Treatment in North America 



69 


South Asia 

Key Insights 
- The South Asia region generated 334 million tonnes of waste in 2016, at an 
average of 0.52 kilogram per capita daily, including both urban and rural 
waste. Total waste generation is expected to double in the region by 2050. 
- About 57 percent of waste in South Asia is characterized as food and green 
waste. 
- About 44 percent of waste is collected in South Asia, mainly through door-todoor 
systems. 
- About three-fourths of waste is currently openly dumped in South Asia, 
although improvements to collection systems and construction of sanitary 
final disposal sites are underway. 
Background and Trends 
The South Asia region has only eight countries but a large population. The 
three population hubs of India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh together have a 
population of 1.68 billion people; Afghanistan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka are 
home to nearly 85 million people; and the smaller states of Bhutan and 
Maldives have about 1.2 million people. The countries in South Asia are 
diverse not only in population, but also in economic development and 
geography. 
Almost all cities in the South Asia region practice some open dumping, 
but cities are increasingly developing sanitary landfills and pursuing 
recycling. Most cities hire private contractors or nongovernmental organizations 
to collect waste from neighborhoods and institutions and pay collectors 
based on the amount of waste transported to disposal sites. Although 
rules and regulations have been developed at national and state levels, these 
criteria are still being translated into practice and accountability structures 
at the city level. 
Implementation of policies is challenging because of a lack of enforcement 
mechanisms. In addition to improving legal enforcement, strengthening 
the technical and institutional capacity of administrators at all levels of 
solid waste management systems, from municipal staff to the regulators 
and operators, is a common priority. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
The South Asia region generated 334 million tonnes of waste in 2016, at 
an average of 0.52 kilogram per person each day (figure 3.26). Rural 
waste generation is significantly lower than urban waste generation and 
reduces the average amount generated in the region. The islands of 



70

Maldives generate the most amount of waste per capita. In cities in South 
Asia, waste generation rates vary widely, with cities such as Kabul, 
Afghanistan, generating about 1.5 kilograms per capita per day, and cities 
such as Butwal, Nepal, generating only about 0.2 kilogram per capita per 
day (Asian Development Bank 2013; World Bank 2016). 
Most waste in the South Asia region is organic (figure 3.27). A large 
proportion of waste is not classified, though it is assumed that most of this 
waste is inert. Waste cleaned from drains and silt is often mixed into the 
solid waste disposed of by municipalities. Construction and demolition 
waste is also often included in the data reported for South Asia though it 
will gradually be managed separately as a result of new rules in India 
established in 2016 (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change 2016). 
Waste Collection 
Excluding Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Afghanistan, where data were not 
available, urban waste collection coverage in South Asia is about 77 percent 
(figure 3.28), although coverage varies considerably by country and city 
(figure 3.29). Rural areas have lower collection coverage rates of about 
40 percent. 
Figure 3.26 Waste Generation Rates: South Asia Region 



71

Figure 3.27 Waste Composition in South Asia 
Figure 3.28 Waste Collection Coverage in South Asia 



72

Figure 3.29 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in South Asia 



73

Figure 3.30 Waste Collection Methods in South Asia 

Waste collection services, where they exist in cities, typically occur 
door-to-door (figure 3.30). In certain cities, such as Butwal, Nepal, and 
Kota, India, residents dispose of waste at a primary collection point, 
from which aggregated waste is transported to the final disposal site. 
This practice is extremely common, and designated primary collection 
sites or open plots of land often eventually become unofficial sites for 
dumping. In Navi Mumbai, India, a waste collector notifies residents to 
bring waste to the collection vehicle (India, Ministry of Urban 
Development 2016). 
Informal waste collection and materials recovery activities are prolific 
in South Asia. Most cities studied reported between 150 and 
1,100 active waste pickers. The large cities of Dhaka, Bangladesh, and 
Delhi, India, reported 120,000 and 90,000 active waste pickers, 
respectively. Unorganized waste pickers are commonly seen working 
at either informal or formal transfer stations. At landfills, waste pickers 
are typically organized or are part of a cooperative (Enayetullah 
and Hashmi 2006). 
Waste Transportation 
On average, waste is transported about 15.5 kilometers between city centers 
and final disposal sites in the South Asia region. Primary collection 
occurs in various ways, and the main forms of transportation are threewheeled 
push carts, tractors, and bicycle rickshaws. Out of 53 cities, 
38 reported aggregating waste at transfer stations or secondary collection 



74

points before transporting it to final sites. Transfer stations may be designated 
sites with minimal infrastructure or constructed with technologies 
for automated sorting. Many aggregation centers are simply temporary 
storage sites and mostly facilitate manual handling of waste. 
Waste Disposal 
Open dumping is common in South Asia (figure 3.31), and most existing 
landfills lack leachate collection and treatment, landfill gas collection, and 
sometimes even liners. However, the remediation of dumpsites and construction 
of formal landfills are actively taking place, and official and 
well-functioning facilities tend to be privately operated. For example, 
Maldives is mitigating dumping of waste by improving waste collection 
systems and constructing sustainable disposal sites that can serve multiple 
islands (World Bank 2017a). Four out of the eight countries recycle 
between 1 and 13 percent of waste, and seven out of the eight countries 
have begun composting programs to manage organic waste. Waste-toenergy 
incineration potential has gained interest, but substantial results 
have not yet been proven. 
Initiatives to improve waste disposal began in India in 2014, and interest 
in other South Asian countries is growing. Many cities are establishing 
central authorities to increase capacity to plan and operate the waste management 
sector. The focus is on developing waste disposal strategies that 
include locally tailored and cohesive approaches. Depending on the locality, 
cities are navigating varied constraints related to land, capacity, availability 
of local operators, financing, and alignment of waste technology and waste 
composition, and more than one solution is needed. Waste management is 
Photo 3.6 Dumpsite in Sri Lanka



75

Figure 3.31 Waste Disposal and Treatment in South Asia 
increasingly recognized as not only a social, health, and environmental 
issue, but an economic one, in which waste recovered and land used wisely 
can generate financial savings. Indian cities can access funds, mainly from 
the Swachh Bharat Mission (box 3.2), to improve waste management 
programs. 
Box 3.2 Swachh Bharat Mission (Clean India Mission) 
The Swachh Bharat Mission is a national initiative in India to clean up cities, 
towns, and rural areas. Interventions range from cleaning roads and infrastructure 
to improving solid waste management and household sanitation practices. 
The government of India and involved stakeholders have supported actions in 
more than 4,000 cities, towns, and rural areas to date. Swachh Bharat is anticipated 
to fund more than $9.5 billion in investments and is providing incentives 
for jurisdictions to compete by publicly monitoring performance across cities. 
Source: Swachh Bharat website (http://www.swachhbharaturban.in). 



76


Sub-Saharan Africa 

Key Insights 
- The Sub-Saharan Africa region generated 174 million tonnes of waste in 2016, 
at a rate of 0.46 kilogram per capita per day. It is the fastest growing region, 
with waste expected to nearly triple by 2050. 
- Waste in Sub-Saharan Africa is primarily organic, with 40 percent of it being 
food and green waste. 
- Overall waste collection rates are about 44 percent, although the rate is much 
higher in urban areas than in rural areas, where waste collection services are 
minimal. 
- About 69 percent of waste is openly dumped, although use of landfills and 
recycling systems is becoming more prevalent. 
- The region is experiencing substantial growth and modernization, with a 
large focus on building sustainable final disposal sites, improving collection 
coverage, closing dumpsites, and providing environmental education for the 
public. 
- Institutional setups for operations and maintenance and the regulatory 
framework are generally not clearly defined. National governments are 
increasingly delivering traditional municipal waste management 
services.
Background and Trends 
The Sub-Saharan Africa region consists of 48 countries and was home to 
1.03 billion people in 2016. It is one of the fastest growing regions of the 
world; more than half of the world’s population growth is anticipated to 
occur in Sub-Saharan Africa by 2050 (United Nations 2017). With waste 
generation expected to more than quadruple by 2050, it is alarming that 
waste is predominantly openly dumped. Waste management systems are 
slowly improving as cities are more frequently prioritizing the construction 
of landfills, closure of dumps, and formalization of collection 
systems to improve the environmental and health impacts of waste. 



77

Countries and cities are also increasingly focusing on solid waste management 
and environmental education to reduce waste generation and 
improve sorting and collection systems. Efforts are also being made to 
improve recycling systems to divert waste from dumps and final disposal 
sites and to increase employment for informal waste collection workers. 
Population growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, amid high poverty rates, 
makes waste service fee collection and financing of the overall system key 
challenges for the region. Because governments have limited resources, 
waste often becomes a lower priority sector. However, governments are 
taking action to improve the financing of solid waste systems and are 
increasingly trying to find innovative tools and resources to address this 
issue. For example, in Senegal fiscal reform is aiming to designate funds for 
solid waste services. 
Experience has shown that a lack of clarity institutionally or politically 
can impede the role of local governments in delivering solid waste management 
services and hinder partnerships with the private sector. National 
governments are now more commonly undertaking traditional municipal 
roles in delivery of solid waste management services. This pattern goes 
against the general global trend of decentralization and has led to mixed 
results. 
Data collection systems for solid waste management are nascent in Sub- 
Saharan Africa and face significant gaps. However, data are increasingly 
being collected by municipal agencies, nonprofits, private operators, consulting 
firms, and other local organizations and cooperatives. Though not 
all data are published online, public data availability is anticipated to 
improve substantially in the near future. 
Waste Generation and Composition 
The Sub-Saharan Africa region generated 174 million tonnes of 
waste in 2016, or 0.46 kilogram per person each day (figure 3.32). 
The region’s per capita generation rate is the lowest globally. The largest 
waste generators are typically middle-income countries or those 
with significant tourist populations. Waste generation in urban areas, 
at 0.74 kilogram per person each day, is higher than the regional average, 
a situation that could be linked to higher income and tourism 
activity. 
More than 40 percent of the waste in the Sub-Saharan Africa region 
is organic (figure 3.33) and 30 percent of waste is typically inert waste 
such as sand and fine particles. Typical consumption patterns in the 
region are changing and moving toward more packaged products and 
electronics. An increase in imports is also leading to larger amounts of 
packaging.



78

Figure 3.32 Waste Generation Rates: Sub-Saharan Africa Region 
Figure 3.33 Waste Composition in Sub-Saharan Africa 



79

Waste Collection 
Less than half of the waste generated in Africa is collected formally 
(figure 3.34). Collection coverage is much more comprehensive in urban 
areas than in rural areas, where collection is often nonexistent. Because of 
moderate formal collection rates, open dumping and burning are commonly 
pursued to eliminate remaining household waste. Often, waste that 
is formally collected is still disposed of at central dumpsites. The informal 
sector is active in many African cities and is largely responsible for 
recycling. 
Waste collection systems are typically more developed in cities, and 
many cities in Sub-Saharan Africa have collection rates of more than 
50 percent (figure 3.35). 
Many cities use a dual system in which waste is first collected door to 
door and later from a centralized point at which collected waste is 
aggregated. Among cities with available data, 88 percent reported that 
waste collection typically occurs on a door-to-door basis. Other neighborhoods, 
including unplanned neighborhoods, have designated areas or 
dumpsters in which residents can deposit their waste. However, littering is 
a major issue in most cities. Despite having bins or dumpsters, it is common 
to see waste disposed of haphazardly. Almost every country in the region is 
at a very early stage in source separation. Efforts are often led by the private 
sector and nongovernmental organizations in the main capital cities at both 
household and commercial levels to improve the purity of waste streams 
and cost recovery. 
It is typical to see higher waste collection rates in formal settlements and 
high-income areas, where it is easier to collect waste as a result of road 
development and greater density of housing. Most waste collection systems 
Figure 3.34 Waste Collection Coverage in Sub-Saharan Africa 



80

Figure 3.35 Waste Collection Rates for Select Cities in Sub-Saharan Africa 



81

Photo 3.7 Waste Collectors in Uganda 
are organized around high-income communities. Informal settlements and 
low-income areas often receive poor or no collection services because of 
social stigma, potential inaccessibility, violence and crime, and difficulties 
in fee collection. 
Waste Transportation 
Waste collection in the Sub-Saharan Africa region often occurs in two 
steps, with handcarts, tricycles, and donkeys commonly used to collect 
waste from households and for transportation to an aggregation site. 
From the aggregation site, small vehicles and trucks are used to bring 
waste to the final disposal site. However, some areas do not have a dual 
system and the waste is either dumped on empty land or in a canal, 
taken to a transfer station, or transported directly to the final disposal 
site. For formal urban waste disposal systems, the distance traveled 
from city center to final disposal sites can range from about 10 to 
40 kilometers. 
Waste Disposal 
Currently, 69 percent of waste in the Sub-Saharan Africa region is openly 
dumped, and often burned (figure 3.36). Some 24 percent of waste is 
disposed of in some form of a landfill and about 7 percent of waste is 
recycled or recovered. As waste systems modernize, the amount of landfilling 
and recycling is anticipated to rise. More sanitary landfills are 
being built in the region; however, the number of new disposal facilities 
is not meeting the need given the growing quantities of waste. Because of 



82

Figure 3.36 Waste Disposal and Treatment in Sub-Saharan Africa 
an increase in dumpsite failures affecting surrounding communities, the 
manner in which dumpsites are being operated is being improved and 
many are being closed completely. Cities are aware of recycling potential 
but recycling initiatives are most common in touristic cities. 
Key challenges in the Sub-Saharan Africa region include overuse of facilities 
and continued disposal even after design capacity has been exceeded, 
citizen resistance to placement of waste facilities near their homes, land 
scarcity, and high urbanization and sprawl. Often, sufficient land is not 
available to service basic city functions, and governments are facing difficulty 
in coordinating services and investment at the intermunicipal level to 
save resources. 
Waste Financing 
Capital financing for necessary infrastructure investments alone is not a 
sufficient solution for Sub-Saharan Africa’s solid waste sector. Many cities 
struggle with planning for long-term sustainability and with the financing 
of operational costs. In certain cases, cities have used donor funding to 
construct well-designed sanitary landfills that ultimately function as dumpsites 
because of lack of operational funding (World Bank 2017b). 
In some cities, national and local governments are able to finance portions 
of the waste system, although general government funding and waste fee collection 
are typically not sufficient for waste operations. Partnerships with 



83

the private sector have been challenging for the region. Although international 
companies are interested in larger public-private partnership opportunities, 
there have been few successes. Financial, institutional, and political 
complications can make it difficult to attract international companies 
for waste activities. Municipalities are looking for ways to expand local 
capacity. 



87 





CHAPTER 4 
Waste Administration and Operations 

Key Insights 
- In most countries, solid waste management is a local responsibility, by 
default or through decentralization policies. Direct central government 
involvement in waste services, other than regulatory oversight or subsidies, 
is rare. 
- About 70 percent of waste services are overseen directly by local public 
entities, with the remainder administered through other levels of government, 
intermunicipal arrangements, mixed public- private entities, or private 
companies. 
- About half of services are operated by public entities. About one-third of 
services, from collection to treatment and disposal of waste, are operated 
through mixed public-private partnerships. 
- The private sector is typically engaged through management or concession 
contracts for collection, treatment, and disposal, and contracts generally 
last fewer than 10 years. 
- Intermunicipal government cooperation is in place in a minority of cities, 
and typically occurs through the use of shared assets for waste transfer, 
disposal, and city cleaning. 
- About two-thirds of countries have created targeted legislation and 
regulations for solid waste management, though enforcement may vary. 
- Almost 70 percent of countries have established institutions with responsibilities 
for policy development and regulatory oversight in the waste 
sector. 
- Systematic public reporting on waste policies and waste data is largely 
limited to high-income countries and some middle-income countries. 



88

Waste management is an essential urban service that requires planning, 
management, and coordination across all levels of government and 
stakeholders. Solid waste management services typically include waste collection 
from households and commercial establishments and haulage to a 
collection point or transfer station, transportation from a collection point 
or transfer station to a final treatment or disposal site, treatment and disposal 
of waste, and street cleaning and drainage management. Countries 
and cities around the world are pursuing a range of administrative and 
operational models to offer some or all of these services. 
In high-income countries, national governments develop laws and 
regulations that establish guidelines, national performance targets, and 
operational and environmental standards. In rare cases national governments 
may operate solid waste services, but solid waste management is 
typically a local service. Local governments, such as cities, prefectures, and 
states, are often responsible for creating more specific local regulations, 
collecting and disposing of waste, and deciding how physical and financial 
resources should be allocated and how costs can be recovered. Local agencies 
are also responsible for identifying private sector partners that may 
build or operate services, siting new landfills or other waste facilities, and 
monitoring service coverage, citizen feedback, and pollution from facilities. 
It is at the local level that innovative waste programs are typically developed, 
such as the introduction of bins of different colors for household 
source separation or local composting programs. 
Adequate waste services are more difficult to achieve in low- and middleincome 
countries, where challenges are as much a result of poor planning 
and service operation as a lack of funding for investments. Daily waste 
management is expensive; requires institutional skills for planning, operational 
management, and oversight; and, where funding is limited, waste 
management competes with other development priorities. Developing 
waste management capacity and mobilizing resources requires strong political 
support. Typical challenges that have repeatedly been identified in 
World Bank studies include the following: 
- Shortage of financial resources, particularly to operate waste collection, 
transport, and disposal systems, caused by lack of revenues from 
households and other waste generators or lack of budget and funding 
in local governments. 
- Complexity of designing and managing decentralized, locally based 
waste collection, transport, and disposal systems while maximizing 
coverage and minimizing environmental impacts. 
- Lack of land and resistance from local populations to development of 
waste facilities. 
- Limited institutional capacity for planning, monitoring, and 
enforcement. 
- Ambiguity around organizational structure and responsibility, and 
coordination both within the same level of government and between 
national, regional, and local governments. 



89

This chapter presents findings at both national and local government 
levels regarding regulations, institutions, and practical approaches to meet 
these operational challenges. 


Solid Waste Regulations 

A foundational aspect of sustainable waste management is proper planning 
and oversight from central authorities. While waste management is 
typically a locally operated service, both national and local governments 
play a role in defining the regulatory framework within which solid waste 
management services can be developed, and this can affect private sector 
engagement. National governments are typically responsible for establishing 
environmental standards for waste management and for creating rules 
for fair and transparent procurement of services from the private sector. 
National laws encourage local governments to adhere to common social 
and environmental standards. Local governments also establish rules and 
regulations that guide households and institutions on the proper management 
and disposal of waste. Typically, the entity that regulates waste management 
is separate from the entity that operates services to promote 
accountability. 
National Waste Regulation 
In this study, 86 percent of countries and economies reported the existence 
of an official national law or guidelines that govern solid waste management. 
Table 4.1 summarizes the number of countries with established 
national laws or other guiding frameworks for solid waste management, 
which may be a specific piece of solid waste regulation or broader environmental 
and urban laws that address solid waste management. 
Table 4.1 Existence of National Waste Management Regulation 



90

Low-income countries are most likely to lack specific laws on waste 
management; in general, solid waste management systems are more nascent 
in these countries. Waste management in lower-income countries is also 
often primarily addressed by municipalities or even communities. 
The number of countries that have specific solid waste management 
laws increases significantly in middle-income countries. Some 88 percent of 
middle-income countries have guiding solid waste management laws or 
frameworks. The vast majority of countries without data on waste legislation 
are in Sub-Saharan Africa, where laws are still being developed. 
Solid waste management laws range from broad environmental rules to 
targeted interventions. For example, Peru’s General Law on Solid Waste 
Management (Ley General de Residuos Sólidos, 27314) addresses all 
aspects of solid waste management, from generation to final disposal. Many 
countries have formed specific laws that address specific waste streams, and 
often, legislation for municipal waste is separate from that for hazardous or 
medical waste. 
Enforcement of laws is a common challenge. Enforcement requires 
adequate staffing, implementation of fees or other penalties, and cultural 
alignment with legislative goals. In Malaysia, the National Solid Waste 
Management Policy was created to standardize and improve waste management 
across the country (Wee et al. 2017). However, deployment efforts 
were challenged by limited financing, low staff technical capacity, and 
ambiguity in the policy’s guidelines. In Rwanda, a national plastic bag ban 
was strictly enforced using border patrol guards to prevent illegal imports 
and multiple penalties for offenders, including fines, jail time, and public 
shaming (de Freytas-Tamura 2017). 
Photo 4.1 Plastic Bag Ban in Kenya



91

Local Waste Regulation 
Because responsibility for executing solid waste management systems 
typically falls on local governments, local rules and regulations are commonplace. 
Local regulations cover specific aspects of waste management, 
including source separation, household and commercial fees, 
disposal sites, bans on plastic or other materials, and the institutions 
and agencies that are responsible for implementing waste operations 
and initiatives. 
This study reveals that most cities have some solid waste management 
rules and regulations (table 4.2). Out of the cities studied, 223 reported the 
presence of official solid waste management policies. Only 18 reported a 
lack of policies, and data were not available for 127 cities. 


Solid Waste Planning 

Solid waste strategies and plans at both the national and local levels allow 
agencies to comprehensively understand the current situation, identify 
future goals, and outline a detailed plan of action to advance the solid 
waste management sector. Planning allows all stakeholders—including 
different government agencies, citizens, associations, and the private 
sector—to be coordinated and allows investments to be made in an 
efficient and targeted manner. 
National Strategies 
In more advanced cases of waste governance, national governments may 
develop a five- to ten-year national strategy that details the current waste 
situation in the country and sets targets for the sector about recycling, 
financial sustainability, citizen awareness, promotion of a green economy, 
Table 4.2 Existence of Urban Waste Management Regulation 



92

reduction of greenhouse gases, and rehabilitation of contaminated sites. 
Sometimes the national strategy contains legally binding legislation or 
other guidelines for individuals and institutions. National governments 
may provide financing or technical expertise, such as by sharing costs or 
evaluating plans for the construction of new disposal sites, to help localities 
achieve national goals. 
The Kenya National Environmental Management Authority published 
Kenya’s National Solid Waste Management Strategy in 2014 in response to 
citizen complaints of poor waste management, outlining collective action 
mechanisms to systematically improve waste management (NEMA 2014; 
Akinyi 2016). Another example, in Mozambique, is a national strategy for 
integrated waste management that details the current waste management 
situation and outlines a 12-year framework for action to address the most 
pressing solid waste management challenges. The strategy provides guidance 
on topics from landfill construction to organization of waste pickers 
and outlines the roles of all stakeholders, including central governments, 
municipalities, businesses, waste pickers, residents, and nongovernmental 
organizations (Tas and Belon 2014). National strategies often define metrics, 
such as recycling rates, to track progress over time. 
Local Master Plans 
Because waste management is a local service, it is much more common for 
cities to develop a solid waste management–focused master plan than for 
countries to create a national strategy. Master plans formalize the locality’s 
goals for solid waste management and plans for implementation. Solid 
waste master plans are comprehensive, outlining planned investments in 
infrastructure, citizen engagement strategies, environmental criteria and 
safeguards, and all aspects of waste collection, transport, and disposal. 
Cities typically implement master plans at a more mature stage in the 
solid waste management sector. In this study, 130 cities reported the 
existence of a master plan, but plans are being implemented in only 87 of 
them (table 4.3). 
Table 4.3 Existence and Implementation of Urban Master Plan 



93

In South Africa, the National Environmental Management: Waste Act of 
2008 mandated all municipalities create an Integrated Waste Management 
Plan (City of Johannesburg 2011). The city of Johannesburg responded by 
creating a plan that details current waste generation and characteristics, 
disposal practices, key roles and responsibilities, and instruments for implementation, 
including funding sources. The plan also details goals and 
targets for waste minimization and recovery, information systems, pollution 
control, governance, and budgets. 


Institutions and Coordination 

Both national and local governments may establish departments dedicated 
to solid waste management, though formalized solid waste management 
institutions are more common at the local level. Centralizing solid 
waste management under a single entity can help ensure that planning 
processes are coordinated, resources are used efficiently, redundancy in 
function is avoided across departments, and all gaps in service are minimized 
and addressed comprehensively. Central agencies can also assume 
responsibility for enforcing solid waste policies and regulations. 
At a macro level, 148 out of 217 countries and economies have national 
agencies dedicated to enforcing solid waste laws and regulations. Data were 
not available in 53 countries, and 16 countries do not have such an agency. 
Furthermore, 19 countries reported the existence of a dedicated solid waste 
management agency, authority, or department. However, more commonly, 
solid waste management falls under the purview of an institution with 
broader responsibilities, such as a ministry of environment, planning, or local 
government. 
At a local level, departments dedicated to solid waste management are 
much more common (table 4.4). A department dedicated to solid waste 
management was reported by 216 cities; 21 cities lacked a dedicated department; 
and data were not available for 131 cities. In addition, 107 cities 
reported having dedicated government units that combat common solid 
waste management issues, such as illegal dumping and littering. 
Coordination is required to ensure consistency between different levels 
of government. Many governments also struggle with overlaps in responsibilities 
across agencies or gaps in responsibilities, since activities related to 
solid waste management often cut across multiple departments. As a solution 
in Pakistan, a new Sindh Solid Waste Management Board was established 
to coordinate waste management decisions across agencies and 
municipalities (SSWMB 2017). Furthermore, a successful model of interjurisdictional 
coordination is detailed in case study 4 in chapter 7, highlighting 
a Japanese experience. 



94

Table 4.4 Oversight of Solid Waste Management in Cities 


Waste Management Operations 
Waste management services are delivered in a variety of ways across the 
world (table 4.5). Waste management is most commonly managed by 
municipalities in a decentralized manner. Solid waste management programs 
are typically designed in response to local conditions such as financing 
availability, local norms, spatial layout of communities, and the ability 
of citizens to pay for services. Where local conditions allow, solid waste 
services can be managed on an intermunicipal scale. Intermunicipal cooperation 
is common in European Union countries such as France, Italy, and 
the Netherlands (Kolsut 2016), where coordination has led to economies of 
scale, cost savings through fewer investments and a wider span of financing 
sources, reduced staffing needs, and exchange of technical skills. 
Intermunicipal coordination is most effective when operational objectives 
and guidelines are similar across entities, such as in European Union states 
sharing stringent membership requirements and legislative frameworks. 
Tokyo, Japan, provides an example of intermunicipal coordination, where 
prefecture governments build final disposal sites shared by multiple municipalities. 
Coordination can be difficult between municipalities that have different 
environmental and waste management priorities, are geographically 
separated, or that manage waste across several disparate departments. 
It is less common for national governments to operate solid waste 
management services. Mixing regulatory and operational responsibilities 



95

Table 4.5 Examples of Waste Management Operations and Administrative Models 
can lead to conflicts in accountability, and local governments are able to 
offer more efficient services and informed plans since they are directly 
connected to the demographic that they serve. However, national operation 
has taken place in limited cases. For example, in Azerbaijan, national 
administration of waste services has enabled streamlined reform, system 
modernization, and standardization of services across different 
regions. The country formed its national strategy in 2006, closed about 
80 percent of its informal dumpsites, and expanded collection services 
from covering 60 percent of the population to covering more than 
75 percent (Van Woerden 2016). Similarly, waste services in smaller 
countries, such as Jamaica and Malaysia, are centrally managed, though 
efforts are being made to separate responsibilities across different departments 
and to engage the private sector in service delivery (JSIF, n.d. 
Manaf, Samah, and Zukki 2009). 
Slightly more than 30 percent of waste management services, from 
primary collection to treatment and disposal, are provided through public-
private partnerships, even though such partnerships can be complex 
to structure and implement. Private operators can bring efficiency and 
financial security to waste management systems under the right conditions. 
Often, the private sector is engaged to help public entities improve 
operations and mitigate the common challenge of unequal collection 
access across economic cohorts. For example, in Lahore, Pakistan, a private 
company not only increased waste collection coverage from 51 percent 
to 88 percent but also enhanced waste monitoring through vehicle 



96

tracking, which improved the way that limited financial and physical 
resources were strategically used and allocated (Ashraf, Hameed, and 
Chaudhary 2016). 
When private entities are involved, governments must consider the territory 
that the entity has control over. For example, cities have pursued varied 
models for waste collection. In the city of San Francisco in the United 
States, a single operator has a designated monopoly to provide waste collection 
services to the whole city, which encourages the company’s participation 
in and ability to test new models and promotes consistency of 
services (Stevens 2011). In Singapore, however, the city is zoned so that 
different operators serve unique geographic sections, thus promoting more 
widespread participation and competition (Singapore National Environment 
Agency n.d.). Governments must balance competition against crowding of 
streets and revenue opportunities for private operators. Finally, some cities 
have commercial entities that directly contract with the hauler of their 
choice; however, this method can lead to other concerns, such as vehicle 
congestion. 
In addition to general solid waste laws, 54 percent of countries studied 
have official laws guiding public entities in engagement with the private 
sector. For 21 percent of countries, such regulation is absent, and data were 
not available for 25 percent of countries. Effective public-private partnership 
laws provide institutional and financial security to private operators 
and increase the viability of engaging the private sector in solid waste management 
operations. 
Cities use a variety of administrative and contracting models across 
the waste management value chain (figure 4.1). Almost all services are 
administered and operated by public entities, with 50–70 percent of cities 
reporting public administration at a municipal level and more than 
40 percent reporting public operation from collection to disposal to 
treatment. Intermunicipal cooperation typically occurs for services involving 
shared assets, such as transfer stations or disposal sites, as well as for 
city cleaning, which may achieve economies of scale across shared spaces. 
The majority of cities with data reported that most waste services are operated 
publicly, but a small fraction, about 15 percent, are operated “directly,” 
which means that a service is provided by independent small-scale organizations 
directly to households. 
Where private entities are engaged, management, concession, and 
other public-private partnership contracts are most commonly used. 
Most contracts last less than 10 years, which provides flexibility to the 
public entity. For waste disposal, which typically entails the operation of 
a fixed asset such as a landfill, about 35 percent of contracts last 10 years 
or longer. 



97

Figure 4.1 Waste Management Administration, Operation, and Financing Models 



98

Figure 4.1 Waste Management Administration, Operation, and Financing Models (continued) 



101





CHAPTER 5 
Financing and Cost Recovery for Waste Management Systems 

Key Insights 
- Basic solid waste management systems covering collection, transport, and sanitary disposal in 
low-income countries cost $35 per tonne at a minimum and often much more. 
- Solid waste management is a large expenditure item for cities and typically comprises nearly 
20 percent of municipal budgets in low-income countries, more than 10 percent in middle-income 
countries, and 4 percent in high-income countries. Budgets can be much higher in certain cases. 
- Systems that include more advanced approaches for waste treatment and recycling cost more, 
from $50 to $100 per tonne or more. The choice of waste management methodology and technology 
depends highly on the local context and capacity for investments and ongoing 
management. 
- User fees range from an average of $35 per year in low-income countries to $170 per year in 
high-income countries. Full cost recovery from user fees is largely limited to high-income 
countries. Almost all low-income countries, and a limited number of high-income countries, 
such as the Republic of Korea and Japan, subsidize domestic waste management from national 
or local budgets. 
- Although public-private partnerships could potentially reduce the burden on local government 
budgets, they could result in compromises in service quality when not structured and managed 
properly. 
- Local governments provide about 50 percent of investments for waste services, and the remainder 
is typically provided through national government subsidies and the private sector. 
- When political support for increasing user fees for households to cost recovery levels is limited, 
cross-subsidizing from payments by waste generators (for example, the commercial 
sector) can help reduce the burden on local government budgets. Commercial fees range 
from about $150 per year in low-income countries to $300 in high-income countries. 
- Volume-based waste fees have been successful in countries like Austria, Korea, and the 
Netherlands but are still uncommon because they require coordinated planning and strong 
enforcement. Households and commercial institutions in low-income countries are typically 
charged a flat fee that is collected on a door-to-door basis.



102

Because solid waste management is commonly a locally managed service, 
operations and financing often fall under the purview of local 
governments. In low- and middle-income countries, waste management 
financing is often limited, and funding must be balanced with the provision 
of other essential services, such as health care, education, and 
housing. Given the potential major impact of the financial sustainability 
of waste systems on the overall health of the city, designing an efficient 
system with clear paths for financing is essential. Furthermore, a wellfunctioning 
system can create a positive feedback loop in which citizens 
gain trust and satisfaction with services and are more willing to pay. With 
a growing global economy and a global population that is anticipated 
to increase from 7.6 billion today to 9.8 billion in 2050, the importance 
of financial efficiency in solid waste management has never been greater 
(United Nations 2017). 


Waste Management Budgets 

Waste management is an expensive service and requires substantial 
investments in physical infrastructure and long-term operations. Solid 
waste management services are also essential to the physical and economic 
health of society and are often a priority budget item for cities. For 
cities in low-income countries, solid waste management expenditures, 
on average, comprise 19 percent of municipal budgets (table 5.1). As 
countries grow economically, more funding is allocated to other public 
services. 
Despite the substantial share of solid waste management expenditures in 
municipal budgets, low- and middle-income countries often face budget 
shortfalls for waste services and thus reduction of costs and recovery of fees 
is often integral to the development of the sector. 
Table 5.1 Solid Waste Management as a Percentage of Municipal Budget 



103


Waste Management Costs 

Municipalities providing waste management services generally experience 
two broad categories of expenditures: (1) capital expenditures, which are 
typically associated with infrastructure investments; and (2) operational 
expenditures, often associated with service provision and equipment 
maintenance. Planning around these two types of expenditures generally 
differs. 
The largest one-off waste management expenditure for municipalities is 
typically for infrastructure investment. Construction of sanitary disposal sites 
and purchase of collection and disposal equipment and bins is a prerequisite 
to offering consistent services to residents. The cost of construction and maintenance 
of disposal facilities may influence the city’s choice of final disposal 
strategies. For example, landfill construction can cost a municipality roughly 
US$10 million to serve a population of 1 million people; the cost of a composting 
facility can range from a few million dollars for basic (windrow) composting 
facilities to about US$10 million for highly mechanized outfits; an 
incinerator with heat and energy recovery cost about $600/annual tonne for 
capital costs (defined as the total capital cost for the lifetime of the plant 
divided by the total annual capacity) for recent plants in Mexico, Poland, 
Singapore, and the United States (Kaza and Bhada-Tata 2018). Transfer 
stations can be very basic with a cost of about US$500,000, but when recycling 
and sorting functions are included, investment increases by several 
times. The technology that is most feasible depends not only on financial 
stability, but also on the technical capacity and local environment of the city. 
Cities offering collection services must also purchase vehicles. In middleand 
high-income countries, large new trucks cost about US$250,000 each, 
while low-income countries often use more localized systems that minimize 
investment costs, such as buggies, handcarts, and donkeys (Lee 2009). 
Cities must balance the fact that newer vehicles are more fuel efficient and 
require fewer parts and less maintenance, but have high initial investment 
costs. Along with capital costs, cities must also factor in the cost of feasibility 
studies and environmental and social assessments that take place ahead 
of construction projections. 
The largest financial challenge for cities is usually the coverage of operational 
expenditures for labor, fuel, and the servicing of equipment. For 
example, for the city of Istanbul, Turkey, labor costs account for 58 percent 
of operational costs for the public collection system, and fuel accounts for 
another 31 percent (Dogan and Suleyman 2003). Tipping fees may be a 
source of revenue or expenditure depending on whether a local government 
is paying a private disposal facility or private haulers and residents are paying 
to use a municipally operated site. Governments that operate waste 
management systems must also factor in costs of repairs, depreciation of 
vehicles and other assets, operational costs for landfill operation such as a 
daily cover, and utilities and overhead costs. For example, in Bahir Dar, 
Ethiopia, equipment was assumed to depreciate at a rate of 20 percent a 



104

year (Lohri, Camenzind, and Zurbrügg 2014). In Seattle in the United 
States, overhead costs comprised 22 percent of the total waste management 
operating budget (DSM Environmental Services 2012). 
Operating costs are almost always substantially higher than capital costs 
for investments and are often the most challenging to sustain. Even when 
capital costs are accounted for (often funded separately, for example, with 
national government subsidies), operational expenditures can easily account 
for 70 percent or more of total required budgets. Across collection and 
disposal operations, waste collection typically accounts for 60–70 percent 
of total costs. However, disposal costs have risen with more advanced sorting 
and materials recovery choices. For many cities, the long-term environmental 
benefit of operational expenditures, including the availability of raw 
materials and preservation of land value, outweighs the higher initial costs. 
See table 5.2 for a summary of typical waste management expenditures 
across major categories. 
Disposal costs vary greatly. In some countries, waste disposal is informal 
and therefore not officially accounted for. In high-income countries, disposal 
costs are better accounted for and are typically between US$50 and US$100 
per tonne. Recycling costs for high-income countries are often comparable to 
the cost of landfilling. Recycling is sometimes made cheaper when landfills 
are taxed or when limited capacity is available and market prices for landfilling 
increase. Construction and operation of anaerobic digestion and incineration 
systems require a large budget (table 5.3) and high management and 
technical capacity, and the technologies are rarely used for municipal waste 
in low- and middle-income countries. 
The cost of open dumping is difficult to quantify because of a lack of 
data on construction and tipping fees. However, dumping incurs substantial 
costs in lost land value and increases the risk of high disaster-related 
Table 5.2 Typical Waste Management Costs by Disposal Type 



105

Table 5.3 Capital and Operational Expenditures of Incineration and Anaerobic Digestion Systems 
costs depending on the proximity and density of the local population to 
the disposal site. Dumpsite closures can also result in significant costs. 
In addition to the costs of land, disasters, and dump closures, poor waste 
management using dumping or uncontrolled burning results in environmental 
costs from air and water pollution and damage to human health. 
These economic costs can often be significant in the long run. 


Waste Management Financing 

Financing waste management systems is often one of the greatest concerns 
for municipalities. Cost recovery is essential to avoid reliance on subsidies 
from own-source revenues or from national or external sources. 
Waste management investment costs and operational costs are typically 
financed differently. Given the high costs associated with infrastructure 
and equipment investments, capital expenditures are typically supported 
by subsidies or donations from the national government or international 
donors, or through partnerships with private companies. 
About half of investments in waste services globally are made by local 
governments, with 20 percent subsidized by national governments, and 
10–25 percent from the private sector, depending on the service provided. 



106

In a public-private partnership in Siam Reap, Cambodia, most waste collection 
and some waste disposal is contracted to private operators without 
public budget support (Denney 2016). The private operators directly collect 
user fees for their services to cover expenses. 
Operational expenditures typically require a solid cost-recovery system 
for long-term sustainability. The starting point for many municipalities is a 
standard user fee, which is charged to users for services delivered. User fees 
may be fixed or variable to encourage reduced waste generation or to provide 
affordability for lower-income residents. The most effective user fees 
match the ability and willingness of users to pay. For example, in a single 
city, poor neighborhoods may be charged no fees while more wealthy 
neighborhoods or those serviced by the private sector or a nongovernmental 
organization pay regular fees. In Yunnan, China, for instance, households 
in urban areas pay US$1.5 per month for waste services, whereas 
services are offered to rural areas at no cost (Zhao and Ren 2017). User fees 
may be billed through an independent waste service bill or in combination 
with other utility and property taxes to increase fee recovery. In addition to 
user fees, cities may recover costs by selling recycled materials and compost, 
generating energy from waste, establishing a financial deposit system on 
recyclables such as water bottles, taxing consumer goods such as plastic 
bags and batteries, and levying licensing fees from operators of transfer 
stations and final disposal sites. 
Table 5.4 presents averages across regions, showing that household fees 
vary greatly. User fees in the Europe and Central Asia region were found to 
be the highest and those in Sub-Saharan Africa were the lowest. 
Fees also vary greatly by income level, with residents in high-income 
countries paying substantially higher fees for services than paid by residents 
in lower-income countries. For low-income countries, fees are usually a flat 
amount per household. Volume-based fees are common in higher-income 
countries. Joint billing with property or utility taxes is practiced for middleand 
high-income countries. Joint billing requires significant coordination 
and therefore maturity of waste management systems, but leads to higher 
Table 5.4 Waste Management User Fees by Region 



107

Table 5.5 Waste Management User Fees by Income Level 
cost recovery amounts. In lower-middle-income countries and low-income 
countries, fees are more often collected door to door. 
Fees charged to commercial institutions often vary by tonnage produced; 
fees are highest in high-income countries, where annual commercial fees 
average US$314 (table 5.5). For some high- and middle-income countries, 
fees are flat for each business, which is simpler to administer and collect. 
Low-income countries tend to charge fees for waste services less often, and 
data availability is scarce. 
Figure 5.1 shows distributions of fee types and billing methods across 
countries by income categories. 
In most countries, the cost of integral waste services (collection, transport, 
treatment, and disposal) cannot be fully recovered from user fees 
and requires subsidies through government transfers or external budget 
support. According to the What a Waste 2.0 study, local governments 
that receive transfers or subsidies for solid waste programs typically 
receive between US$4 and US$10 per capita per year. The average of subsidies 
or transfers from central governments is US$8 per capita per year. 
The agency providing funding may be the national government or a 
regional government. For example, in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
the cantonal government provided almost US$4.5 million for intermunicipal 
communal services such as street cleaning (KJKP 2016). In Yangon, 
Myanmar, the regional government funds city waste services, including 
salaries, uniforms, and the purchase and maintenance of equipment, 
which amounted to US$8.2 million in 2014 (CCAC, n.d.). In Majuro, 
Marshall Islands, the city government receives an annual operating 
subsidy of $325,000 from the national government (ADB 2014). 
A partnership with the private sector is commonly pursued as a mechanism 
for achieving efficiency, technical expertise, and financial investment 
in waste management systems. In Istanbul, Turkey, waste collection was 
found to be 38 percent more cost efficient when operated by a private operator 
rather than a public operator (Dogan and Suleyman 2003). Private 
corporations may participate at all steps in a waste management value 
chain, including construction and operation of disposal sites and transfer 




108

Figure 5.1 Waste Management Fee Type and Billing Method 



109

Figure 5.1 Waste Management Fee Type and Billing Method (continued)
stations, waste collection from homes and businesses, street cleaning, and 
citizen education on waste reduction and source separation. Private partners 
recover costs through their service provision. Therefore, successful 
municipalities ensure that private corporations are either paid directly by 
the locality or are provided with stable opportunities to earn revenues from 
tipping fees, user fees, or the sale of recycled materials. Environments that 
are typically conducive to private sector partnerships include simple and 
transparent procurement processes, minimal political and currency risk, 
and strong legal systems that enforce payments and encourage user compliance 
with waste management rules and regulations, such as those about 
littering and source separation. The lower the risks, the more likely it is for 
a private corporation to participate in the waste management system. 
A unique form of private sector participation is the extended producer 
responsibility (EPR) system. In an EPR system, the cost for the final recycling 
or disposal of materials is borne by the producer of the good. Producers 
may pay the municipality directly for the cost of collection and disposal or 
develop a system for citizens to return the product. In either case, producers 
will often price the cost of disposal into the product so that consumers ultimately 
bear the disposal cost. Therefore, both producers and consumers are 
financially and logistically responsible for their resource usage. EPR systems 
ultimately reduce government costs, divert waste from disposal facilities to 
save space, and encourage environmentally friendly consumption (Product 
Stewardship Institute 2014). 



110

Solid waste management systems in low- and middle-income countries 
that are in early development or undergoing expansion often pursue 
external financing, especially for capital expenditures. Where waste management 
initiatives are aligned with national objectives, local governments 
may obtain financing from national transfers. Local waste management 
projects may also be financed through loans and grants from development 
agencies or regional banks that also commonly provide technical 
project support. Some financiers are testing a model in which payments 
are tied to proven outcomes. This model of results-based financing is 
detailed in box 5.1.
Box 5.1 Results-Based Financing in Waste Management 
An increasingly common strategy for promoting the efficient use of limited funds 
and for creating sustained behavior change is results-based financing (RBF). In 
this financing structure, payment for solid waste services depends on the delivery 
of predetermined results (Lee et al. 2014). By tying financing to outcomes, 
RBF encourages stakeholders to operate efficiently and change their behavior. 
RBF from governments or external institutions can be tailored to achieve several 
objectives and help waste management stakeholders do the following: 
- Increase fee collection, such as by matching a portion of the fees collected 
by the managing institution 
- Promote source separation, waste reduction, and recycling, such as by 
providing a stipend to neighborhoods that sort and separate an adequate 
quantity of clean recyclables 
- Strengthen waste collection and transportation, such as by paying waste 
collectors upon successful and timely delivery of waste to the final disposal 
site 
- Design efficient infrastructure projects, such as by making loans or grants 
for a new landfill project contingent on successful construction of various 
phases 
- Defray risk for investors and increase investments, such as by delaying 
payments until proof of service success or completion of infrastructure 
In Nepal, the World Bank supported a project to help bridge the gap between 
the costs of delivering improved waste management services and the revenues 
gained from user fees. For this project, payments were made based on the 
achievement of benchmarks such as the number of households receiving daily 
waste collection services, the cleanliness of public areas, and the feedback of 
households. These interventions greatly improved service quality. Furthermore, 
the RBF approach helped municipalities to gain financial stability by sustainably 
increasing user fees and improving the recovery of user fees by providing subsidies 
in proportion to the amount of fees collected by cities. 
Another example is a World Bank-supported project in the West Bank, where 
results-based financing was used to combine the financing of the service to the 
poor while leveraging private sector engagement in managing and operating 
the sanitary landfill, transfer stations, and transportation of waste. 



111

Finally, carbon financing is a strategy that has been used in limited cases 
by waste management projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, such 
as the installation of landfill gas capture infrastructure or composting of 
organic waste (box 5.2). 
The appropriate sources of financing depend heavily on the local context, 
and a mix of strategies is often used to sustainably implement a solid 
waste management project. 
Box 5.2 Carbon Finance 
Carbon finance provides payments to projects that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by allowing entities that can reduce emissions at a low cost to receive 
payments from entities whose costs of reducing emissions are high. The entity 
that buys emissions reduction credits can claim credit for reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, although it did not implement the project itself. Purchasing 
emissions credits can help countries achieve national climate goals, such as a 
Nationally Determined Contribution created as part of the international Paris 
Climate Agreement, and allow private entities to adhere to national climate laws 
or offset emissions from business activities (Müller 2017; World Bank 2015). 
Solid waste projects that avoid greenhouse gas emissions include the capture 
of methane gas at a landfill or the composting of organic waste, as compared 
to the higher release of methane from decomposing waste at a dump or 
landfill. Waste projects that reduce emissions can sell certified emissions reductions 
on a public or private emissions trading system. The European Union, 
countries such as New Zealand and Switzerland, and states and provinces such 
as California, United States, and Ontario, Canada, have established emissions 
trading systems (UNDP 2017). For example, several landfill gas capture projects 
in Brazil were partially financed by selling emissions reductions through the 
World Bank’s Carbon Partnership Facility (World Bank 2014, 2018). 
A historical framework that motivated carbon trading was the Kyoto 
Protocol, established at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) in 2005, through which industrial countries committed to 
emissions reduction targets (UNEP n.d.). Through the UNFCCC’s Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM), wealthy countries could invest in carbonreducing 
projects in low- and middle-income countries to meet their Kyoto 
commitments (Appasamy and Nelliyat 2007). Through the CDM, several waste 
projects, such as composting plants in Bangladesh and Uganda, were implemented 
(Waste Concern 2014; AENOR 2009). However, since the commitments 
to the Kyoto Protocol expired in 2012, carbon trading for waste projects has 
greatly waned. Today, carbon financing for solid waste management faces 
mixed results and depends heavily on regulatory frameworks regarding emissions 
and air quality to establish an active marketplace with high prices. 
A more recent form of carbon finance is the Pilot Auction Facility for 
Methane and Climate Change Mitigation, which is an innovative mechanism 
that encourages private sector investments in projects that reduce emissions.



115





CHAPTER 6 
Waste and Society 

Key Insights 
- Uncollected waste and poorly disposed of waste significantly affect public 
health and the environment, with the long-term economic impact of environmental 
recovery often resulting in multiple times the costs of developing 
and operating simple, adequate waste management systems. 
- Waste management contributes nearly 5 percent of global greenhouse 
gas emissions, mainly driven by food waste and improper management of 
waste. Even basic system improvements can reduce these emissions by 
25 percent and more. 
- Of the cities with available data, 29 reported having completed an environmental 
assessment in the past five years while 73 cities reported no recent 
formal environmental assessment. 
- Waste management systems should take into account potential extreme 
weather such as heavy storms that may cause the collapse of formal or 
informal waste facilities or damage urban infrastructure. 
- High-income countries are attempting to divert waste from landfills and 
incinerators and increase adoption of recycling and waste reduction. 
- More than 15 million people globally earn a living informally in the waste 
sector (Medina 2010). Waste pickers—often women, children, the elderly, 
the unemployed, and/or migrants—are a vulnerable demographic. 
- The number of female waste pickers can often exceed the number of male 
waste pickers. In Vientiane, Lao PDR, and Cusco, Peru, 50 percent and 
80 percent of waste pickers are female, respectively (Arenas Lizana 2012; 
Keohanam 2017). 
- Of the cities with available data, 24 reported having completed a social 
assessment in the past five years while 73 cities reported no recent formal 
social assessment. 



116

Waste management has broad societal impacts. The way that waste is 
managed affects the health of the environment, the livelihood and 
well-being of vulnerable populations, and the relationships between governments 
and citizens. Solid waste management influences how a society 
lives on a daily basis, and its strengths and failures can have a magnified 
impact during crisis situations. Although limited data were collected for this 
report regarding environment and climate change, citizen engagement, and 
the informal sector, the report discusses these key topics, in addition to technology 
trends, to highlight several critical aspects that a well-functioning 
waste management system should consider. 


Environment and Climate Change 

Solid waste management is inextricably linked to environmental outcomes 
and their subsequent economic consequences. At the local and regional 
levels, inadequate waste collection, improper disposal, and inappropriate 
siting of facilities can have negative impacts on environmental and public 
health. At a global scale, solid waste contributes to climate change and is 
one of the largest sources of pollution in oceans. 
In low- and many middle-income countries, inadequate waste collection 
and uncontrolled dumping or burning of solid waste are still an 
unfortunate reality, polluting the air, water, and soil. When waste is 
burned, the resulting toxins and particulate matter in the air can cause 
respiratory and neurological diseases, among others (Thompson 2014). 
Piles of waste produce toxic liquid runoff called leachate, which can 
drain into rivers, groundwater, and soil. Organic waste entering waterways 
reduces the amount of oxygen available and promotes the growth 
of harmful organisms (Bhada-Tata and Hoornweg 2016). Marine pollution 
is also increasing as a result of mismanaged solid waste on land, 
poor disposal practices by sea vessels, and runoff from sewage and 
polluted streams. Universal plastic usage is also leading to increasing 
nonbiodegradable waste litter in natural environments. (Please refer to 
case study 16 in chapter 7 for more information on marine litter and 
box 6.1 for information on plastic waste.) 
A study focused on Southeast Asia estimated the economic cost of 
uncollected household waste that is burned, dumped, or discharged to 
waterways to be US$375/tonne (McKinsey 2016). For the same region, 
the World Bank estimated the integrated waste management costs for 
basic systems meeting good international hygienic standards to be 
US$50–US$100/tonne. 
An environmental assessment can help governments understand the 
costs of solid waste management and its impacts on the environment as well 
as potential downstream issues. Of the cities studied with available data, 
29 reported having completed an environmental assessment in the past five 
years, while 73 cities reported that no formal environmental assessment 
had been conducted in the past five years. 



117

Box 6.1 Plastic Waste Management 
In 2016, the world generated 242 million tonnes of plastic waste—12 percent of all municipal 
solid waste. This waste primarily originated from three regions—57 million tonnes from East 
Asia and the Pacific, 45 million tonnes from Europe and Central Asia, and 35 million tonnes from 
North America. 
The visibility of plastic waste is increasing because of its accumulation in recent decades and its 
negative impact on the surrounding environment and human health. Unlike organic waste, plastic can 
take hundreds to thousands of years to decompose in nature (New Hampshire Department of 
Environmental Services n.d.). Plastic waste is causing floods by clogging drains, causing respiratory 
issues when burned, shortening animal lifespans when consumed, and contaminating water bodies 
when dumped into canals and oceans (Baconguis 2018). In oceans, plastic is accumulating in swirling 
gyres that are miles wide (National Geographic n.d.). Under ultraviolet light from the sun, plastic is 
degrading into “microplastics” that are almost impossible to recover and that are disrupting food 
chains and degrading natural habitats (United States NOAA n.d.). The Ellen MacArthur Foundation 
(2016) anticipates that, by weight, there will be more plastic in the oceans than fish by 2050 if nothing is 
done. 
Plastic waste mainly enters the environment when it is poorly managed, such as through open 
dumping, open burning, and disposal in waterways. Unfortunately, with more than one-fourth of 
waste dumped openly and many formal disposal sites managed improperly, plastic litter is increasing. 
Even when plastic waste is collected, many countries lack capacity to process the waste. In 2017, 
Europe exported one-sixth of its plastic waste, largely to Asia (The Economist 2018). 
There are many ways to curb plastic waste—by producing less, consuming less, and better managing 
the waste that already exists to prevent contamination or leakage. Taking these actions requires 
engagement from numerous stakeholders in society, including citizens, governments, community 
organizations, businesses, and manufacturers. Policy solutions, increased awareness, and improved 
design and disposal processes, among others, can minimize the impact of plastic waste on society. 
Policy : Before pursuing dedicated plastics management solutions, governments must first 
focus on holistic management of waste. Cities need consistent collection services, safe and environmentally 
sound disposal, and consistent enforcement of policy before targeted interventions 
for plastic can be fully effective. Without strong basic waste management systems, plastic is likely 
to continue to be dumped when uncollected, citizens and businesses are less likely to comply with 
restrictions on materials for consumption or manufacturing, and cost recovery for waste systems 
will continue to be a struggle. With adequate primary waste management services in place, many 
cities have succeeded in focused interventions. For example, San Francisco, United States, implemented 
a plastic bag ban that led to a 72 percent decrease in plastic litter on local beaches from 
2010 to 2017 (Mercury News 2018). In Rwanda and Kenya, plastic bag bans have been implemented 
effectively with financial and other legal penalties (de Freytas-Tamura 2017). In 2018, the European 
Union launched a strategy called Plastic Waste that aims to make all plastic packaging recyclable by 
2030 and to ensure that waste generated on ships is returned to land (EU 2018b). However, innovative 
policies concerning plastic will not solve the issue of plastic mismanagement without proper 
institutions, systems, and incentives. 
Society : Management of plastic waste often starts at the household and individual levels, and 
strategies to educate and motivate citizens can dramatically change behavior. In Jamaica, community 
members that serve as Environmental Wardens sensitize their neighbors about local cleanliness and 
safe and environmentally friendly disposal of waste. Environmental Wardens are community 
(Box continues on next page)



118

Box 6.1 Plastic Waste Management (continued)
members employed by the Jamaican National Solid Waste Management Authority through a World 
Bank–supported project (Monteiro and Kaza 2016). Their role is to spread awareness about waste 
management and to keep communities clean and healthy. The communities and schools that are part 
of the project collect plastic bottles in large volumes, through competitions, and remove plastic litter 
from shared spaces and drains. They sell the collected plastic bottles to recyclers. 
Industries : Plastic waste can be reduced or put to productive use at both a local and a global 
scale. Industries can alter manufacturing processes to reduce the amount of material needed, use 
recycled materials as inputs, or design new materials that can be degraded or more easily recycled. 
At a local level, recovered plastic can be used as inputs to make cement blocks, roads, and household 
goods such as baskets and mats (Growth Revolution Magazine 2009). These outlets for productive 
use can, in turn, drive increased collection and recovery of plastic waste. With about half 
of the plastic ever manufactured having been produced in the past 15 years, the collaboration of 
industry in reducing production and improving recycling is increasing in importance (National 
Geographic 2018). 
Climate Change Mitigation 
One of the major ways that solid waste contributes to climate change is 
its generation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The 1.6 billion 
tonnes of carbon dioxide–equivalent (CO2-equivalent) emissions estimated 
for 2016 are anticipated to increase to 2.6 billion tonnes by 2050. 
Emissions from solid waste treatment and disposal, primarily driven by 
disposal in open dumps and landfills without landfill gas collection systems, 
were calculated using the CURB tool,1 and they account for about 
5 percent2 of total global GHG emissions (World Bank 2018a; Hausfather 
2017). GHG emissions result from inadequate waste collection, uncontrolled 
dumping, and burning of waste. Waste releases methane gas 
when disposed of in an oxygen-limited environment such as a dump or 
a landfill and releases pollutants and particulate matter during inefficient 
transportation and burning. Methane, generated from decomposing 
organic waste, is the solid waste sector’s largest contributor to GHG 
emissions. It is many times more potent than CO2.3 Efforts to formalize 
the management of waste can significantly reduce GHG emissions. For 
example, a study by Zero Waste Europe concluded that the European 
Union could eliminate as much as 200 million tonnes of GHG emissions 
per year by 2030 with improved waste management practices (Ballinger 
and Hogg 2015). 
Progress has been made in recent years. According to a United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change report, from 1990 to 2015 the 
waste sector experienced the largest relative decrease in GHG emissions, at 
20 percent, compared with other sectors (UNFCCC 2017). The emissions 
decrease is in part attributed to the growing effort of many cities to undertake 
mitigation activities in solid waste management. The Carbon Disclosure 



119

Project shows that nearly 50 cities across the world have adopted mitigation 
measures in their climate plans (Carbon Disclosure Project 2013; IPCC 
2007a). Looking ahead, more than 80 countries have identified solid waste 
management as an intervention area in their Nationally Determined 
Contributions, which are global commitments made by each country to 
mitigate and adapt to climate change under the historic United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change agreement (Kampala Waste 
Management 2017). 
Emissions can be mitigated through improved waste collection, waste 
reduction, reuse of products, recycling, organics waste management, and 
capture of GHGs for flaring or energy recovery. Reducing collection fleet 
lag times, improving routing efficiency such as through the use of geographic 
information systems, selecting cleaner fuels, and using fuel-efficient 
vehicles are potential approaches to reducing transportation emissions 
(Seto et al. 2014). Composting and anaerobic digestion are organic waste 
treatment options that prevent the generation of methane or its release into 
the atmosphere. Where landfills are used, the associated methane gas can be 
captured and flared, converted to power, used to heat buildings, or utilized 
to serve as fuel for vehicles. Waste-to-energy incinerators, which are relatively 
more complex and expensive, can reduce GHG emissions while generating 
electricity or thermal energy when operated effectively and to 
environmentally sound standards. A World Bank study in Indonesia shows 
that even basic improvements, such as increasing waste collection rates to 
85 percent from 65 percent and introducing controlled landfilling for waste 
disposal, reduces GHG emissions by 21 percent (World Bank 2018b). 
These GHG reductions from the waste sector are an important element of 
Indonesia’s committed Nationally Determined Contributions to the Paris 
Climate Agreement (Government of Indonesia 2016). 
Climate Change Resilience 
In the long term, the global community should consider solid waste resilience 
in addition to mitigation. As climate patterns change, waste management 
systems must prepare for extreme weather patterns that may 
cause waste to clog drainage systems during floods, landfills and dumps 
to collapse under heavy rains, or damage to urban infrastructure that 
may dramatically increase waste volumes. Cities should aim to ensure 
that their collection, transportation, and disposal systems can function 
regardless of the shock they face and should site the facilities to be 
resilient. 
Climate change resilience at the local level may include the following 
planning and policy actions: 
- Careful site selection for waste disposal based on topography and 
geology, natural resources, sociocultural factors, natural disaster 
patterns, and economy and safety (Al-Jarrah and Abu-Qdais 2006). 
For instance, a risk assessment can be done in flood-prone cities to 



120

determine the location, design, construction, operation, and decommissioning 
of waste facilities (Winne et al. 2012). 
- Sufficient waste management capacity to meet projections of the city’s 
current and anticipated growth. 
- Emergency disposal sites and stakeholders for disposal of excessive 
amounts of waste to ensure systems function in times of disaster. 
- Identification of vulnerabilities in existing infrastructure to prevent 
failure of facilities, and necessary investments in maintenance and 
upgrades. 
- Formal education, community awareness efforts, and government 
incentives to promote responsible waste disposal and reduction to prevent 
litter that may clog drains or affect surrounding areas. 
Circular Economy 
Efforts to move toward a circular economy are gaining momentum, 
particularly in Europe. The circular economy model aims to use waste 
streams as a source of secondary resources and to recover waste for 
reuse and recycling. This approach is expected to achieve efficient economic 
growth while minimizing environmental impacts (Halkos and 
Petrou 2016). 
In a circular economy, products are designed and optimized for a cycle 
of disassembly and reuse. The intention is to extend the lifespan of consumables 
and to minimize the environmental impact of final disposal. For challenging 
products, such as computers that are subject to rapid technological 
advancement and other durables containing metals and plastics that do not 
easily degrade, better disposal solutions and reuse could be part of the 
design process from the start. 
In December 2015, the European Commission adopted a European 
Union Action Plan for a circular economy (EU 2015). In 2018 the European 
Union adopted a set of measures that support the implementation of the 
Action Plan and the European Union’s vision of a circular economy 
(EU 2018a). These measures do the following: 
- Set a goal to make all plastic packaging recyclable by 2030 and 
describe a holistic strategy to improve the economics and quality of 
plastics recycling 
- Present ways to integrate legislation on waste, consumer products, and 
chemicals 
- Outline 10 key indicators for monitoring progress in moving toward a 
circular economy across production, consumption, waste management, 
and investments 
- Describe actions for more circular consumption of 27 of the most 
common materials used in the economy 
Outside of Europe, the concept of a circular economy is slowly being 
embraced by national and local governments, and sometimes drives the 
development of goals and investments.



121


Technology Trends 

As technology changes the way people live, communicate, and transact, it 
also affects the way waste is managed around the world. Governments 
and companies that manage waste integrate technologies at all steps of the 
value chain to reduce costs, increase materials for energy recovery, and 
connect with citizens. 
Despite the ability of technological solutions to improve the way 
resources are used and recycled, technology selection differs by context. 
Communities vary by geography, technical capacity, waste composition, 
and income level and often the best solution is neither the newest nor the 
most advanced technologically. Whereas a mobile app may be the simplest 
way to inform citizens on service changes in an affluent city, technologies 
such as radio advertisements may be optimal in neighborhoods with high 
illiteracy rates. The following section reviews several of the simple and 
advanced technologies that have emerged to improve waste management 
around the world. 
Data Management 
Data are increasingly serving as the basis for decision making in waste 
management. From information on the layout and characteristics of local 
neighborhoods and the activity of collection trucks to data on recovery of 
waste fees, accurate information allows governments and operators to 
design and run more efficient operations and save money. 
Formal information systems are increasing in cities but are not universal. 
From the data collected for this report, 29 percent of countries reported the 
existence of an information system. At an urban level, 49 cities reported an 
established information system, 89 did not have one, and 231 countries 
lacked data on information systems. 
As their capacity has increased, many agencies have developed or 
improved central information systems to improve planning and to transparently 
monitor performance. For example, in Quito, Ecuador, La Empresa 
Metropolitana de Aseo (the Metropolitan Cleaning Company) has developed 
a central data management system that tracks collection routes, generates 
reports on service performance metrics, and allows citizens to report 
infractions of waste regulations (Sagasti Rhor 2016). In Japan, a central 
data system connects waste facilities around the country to a central 
national waste information system (Kajihara 2017). Measurements of toxins 
and emissions are reported in real time to the central database. Any 
problems in equipment operations trigger automatic reports to the plant 
operator so that emergencies can be addressed immediately. Other typical 
uses of information systems are detailed in box 6.2. 
When it comes to data, solutions need not be complex. Simple data tools 
such as the Excel-based Data Collection Tool for Urban Solid Waste 
Management, developed by the World Bank and the Climate and Clean Air 
Coalition, can guide cities and planners in understanding the local waste 
situation quantitatively and comprehensively (World Bank 2013). 



122

Box 6.2 Examples of Information That Can Be Aggregated Using a 
Waste Management Data System 
- Real-time locations and routes of collection vehicles 
- Weight of waste disposed of at different locations 
- Emissions of landfills or waste-to-energy facilities 
- Records of user payments 
- History of waste collection at households 
- Video streams of activities of waste equipment 
- Radio and email communications with staff 
- Registration of waste pickers 
- Feedback from citizens 
- Inventory of facilities and equipment
Waste Reduction and Manufacturing 
Technology has been commonly used to support reduction of the amount 
of waste generated globally and to change manufacturing processes to 
reduce waste or to increase recyclability. In the Republic of Korea, radiofrequency 
identification (RFID) chips are often used to motivate citizens to 
reduce the waste that they generate. These small radio chips are embedded 
in personal cards that citizens use to open dumpsters and log the weight of 
the waste that they dispose of. Citizens are billed by the weight registered 
on the chip and are motivated to reduce the waste that they produce as 
a result. Korea’s RFID-focused approach and overarching information 
management system are detailed in case study 17 in chapter 7. 
Technologies used in manufacturing aim to enable the reuse of materials 
or decrease the use of virgin materials. Packaging innovations such as biodegradable 
forks and bags reduce plastic waste and sometimes allow users 
to compost these materials. However, new materials require appropriate 
management, and poorly managed biodegradable packaging can lead to 
increased GHG emissions when landfilled or dumped and can fail to 
degrade fully in the wrong conditions (Vaughan 2016). Software is available 
that allows manufacturers to take waste into consideration in the 
product design process and to choose materials that have the least impact 
on the environment (Building Ecology n.d.). Some companies have developed 
processes that use waste materials as inputs for other products, such 
as using plastic and textiles to create new garments. Finally, new platforms 
are emerging that create a marketplace for used goods, thus reducing 
the need to manufacture new products (Sustainable Brands 2017). 
Waste Collection 
Waste collection and associated transportation is often the costliest step in 
waste management, and technology is extensively available to increase efficiency. 
Starting with the use of a geographic information system, a city can 
optimize routing and minimize improper use of trucks (Longhi et al. 2012). 



123

Photo 6.1 Solar-Powered Waste Compaction Bins in the Czech Republic
Sensors can optimize routes and reduce unnecessary pickups. Dumpster 
sensors can signal how full a dumpster is so that pickups can be made 
accordingly. Solar-powered compactor bins use solar power to compact 
waste to one-sixth of its original volume and can alert the municipality or 
waste collector when a sensor detects that the bin is reaching capacity. 
In locations with sufficient infrastructure, relevant geographical conditions, 
and ample financing, alternative approaches are being used for 
waste collection. Automation for waste collection vehicles ranges from 
the lifting of bins placed in the back of the truck to mechanical side arms 
that automatically pick up standardized bins directly from households. 
Even more automated collection solutions are being tested. In a limited 
number of areas with restricted transportation access or that are extremely 
dense, a more unusual approach could be pneumatic waste collection. In 
Roosevelt Island, New York City, United States, in an attempt to establish 
a car-free island, pneumatic waste collection was set up underground so 
that residents in high-rise buildings could place waste in a chute in their 
buildings that would be sucked into a tube, via a vacuum, to a central 
point for treatment and disposal (Chaban 2015). Although a pneumonic 
system could be a healthier and less congested alternative to truck-based 
collection systems, hurdles to adopting pneumonic systems could include 
cost and the inability to install needed infrastructure given a city’s existing 
layout and substructure. 
Mobile applications are also being implemented to assist in urban waste 
collection systems. Mobile applications are being used to inform citizens of 
collection schedules, source-separation guidelines, and fees. I Got Garbage 
is an example of a mobile application in India that is used by households to 
request waste collection services (box 6.3). 



124

Box 6.3 I Got Garbage 
I Got Garbage is an organization operating in Indian cities that uses an 
online platform to match waste pickers with households and businesses 
seeking waste services. The organization has successfully created and 
equipped waste social enterprises with the necessary skills for impact at 
scale. I Got Garbage supports more than 10,000 waste pickers and offers 
waste services from waste collection to local organics management and 
value-added recycling. 
Figure B6.3.1 Features of I Got Garbage Application 
Waste Treatment and Disposal 
Technology is being used in a variety of ways to improve waste treatment 
and disposal. However, the range of optimal technologies varies greatly by 
income level and local characteristics. More detailed information and 
guidance regarding solid waste management treatment and disposal technologies 
can be found in the World Bank’s Decision Maker’s Guides for 
Solid Waste Management Technologies (Kaza and Bhada-Tata 2018). 
Low-Income Countries 
Although open dumping and burning are common in low-income countries, 
there is a growing trend toward improving recycling and disposing 
of waste in controlled or sanitary landfills. Recycling is typically done by 
the informal sector in an unorganized fashion. Small-scale or even household 
biogas systems are also increasing in prevalence. 



125

Middle-Income Countries 
Landfills are the most common final disposal method in middle-income 
countries and are generally anticipated to continue being so. Improvements 
in recycling and in organics management are increasing. For recycling, 
sorting plants that involve manual or some form of automated sorting are 
becoming more common. 
Primarily because of problems with the availability of land, large metropolitan 
cities in middle-income countries are looking at ways to avoid the 
development of large sanitary landfill sites, often far away from the city center, 
and to develop waste-to-energy incineration schemes instead. High land prices 
and often-elevated levels of electricity feed-in tariffs can be an important push 
for these investments. However, high costs, usually significantly above current 
cost levels, and the high organic composition of the waste, meaning that it is 
low in calorific value, also could present challenges to implementation. 
However, it is expected that modern waste incinerators could be built in some 
middle-income countries in the coming years. In China, quick development of 
incineration capabilities has already occurred, and the practice has become 
increasingly common in larger cities in Eastern China (Li et al. 2016). 
High-Income Countries 
Sanitary landfills and incinerators are prominent in high-income countries. 
High-income countries experience greater recovery and reintegration of 
materials from recycling and organics and use of byproducts such as 
refuse-derived fuel or other energy from waste than lower-income 
countries. Waste-derived energy is used for a range of purposes, such as in 
industry or to power waste facilities or buses. Automated landfill monitoring 
has increased, with some sites even using drones to assess the capacity 
of cells (Lucero et al. 2015). 
High-income countries are making a substantial effort to recover materials 
from the source, with an emphasis on recycling and productive use of organic 
waste. Automation in recycling centers ranges from a conveyor belt to use of 
optical lasers and magnetic forces to separate waste (Peak 2013). Citizen participation 
for source separation of waste is common for smaller communities 
of less than 50,000 inhabitants, and mechanical sorting is commonly used for 
large cities. Greater attention is also being placed on management of food 
and green waste, sometimes through windrow composting, in-vessel composting, 
anaerobic digestion, and waste-to-liquid technologies. These technologies 
allow organic waste to be used effectively through capture of biogas 
and creation of a soil amendment or liquid fertilizer. These advances are 
complemented by improvements to distributed waste management, which 
emphasizes household interventions such as source separation. 
Some solutions are less well-known or are still being piloted. A bioreactor 
landfill is a type of sanitary landfill that involves recirculation of leachate 
to more quickly degrade organic waste than in natural situations, 
increase landfill gas generation in a concentrated period, and reduce final 
leachate treatment, under certain conditions (Di Addario and Ruggeri 



126

2016). Nonlandfill solutions that have been available for some time but 
have not been applied at large scale with municipal solid waste include 
advanced thermal technologies such as pyrolysis, gasification, and plasma 
arc technologies (Rajasekhar et al. 2015). These thermal processes break 
down waste with high temperatures in a zero- or low-oxygen environment 
with one of the main outputs being a synthetic gas. When these 
processes are applied to municipal solid waste, commercial and technical 
viability has shown mixed results, with multiple failed attempts. 
A number of countries, particularly Japan, Korea, and some countries 
in Western Europe, have almost completely moved away from landfilling, 
and aim to reduce incineration and maximize waste reduction and 
recycling. With recycling reaching 50 percent and more in a few Western 
European countries, trading of household waste across countries for 
incineration is increasing. 


Citizen Engagement 

The success of sustained solid waste management is critically linked with 
public engagement and trust. Waste managers rely on citizens to consciously 
reduce the amount of waste they generate, separate or manage 
specific waste types at home, dispose of waste properly, pay for waste 
management services, and approve new disposal sites. To motivate this 
support, governments must gain the trust of citizens. Cities and countries 
are engaging the public by providing high-quality services that earn 
approval and trust and that, in turn, motivate citizens to pay for services, 
be environmentally aware, and comply with guidelines and regulations. 
Although changing citizen behavior can take time, the benefits of a strong 
relationship with the public are invaluable to a waste management system. 
Education 
Educational programs are a key aspect of raising awareness for solid waste. 
Many countries reach citizens using media. Effective programs distribute 
content in a variety of languages and through both basic and advanced 
technology, such as radio, television, and mobile phone applications. Other 
governments focus on schools to educate young citizens who will eventually 
become environmentally conscious adults. For example, in Kingston, 
Jamaica, school programs incorporate environmental and waste management 
issues into the formal curriculum and participate in hands-on activities 
such as onsite recycling, composting, and gardening. Vegetables grown 
in school gardens are used at the schools or given to students (Clarke, personal 
communication 2017). Some schools also encourage students and 
citizens to visit waste facilities such as recycling centers or landfills. 
Of the countries and cities studied, several make waste management 
information available to the public. The most common types of information 
made available include collection schedules and waste drop-off 
locations, budgets and fees, local statistics on waste generation and 



127

composition, and community programs and recycling campaigns. For 
example, Bangkok, Thailand, publishes the Bangkok State of the 
Environment Report periodically, providing a comprehensive review of 
solid waste management in the city (Bangkok Metropolitan Administration 
2012). Yokohama, Japan, reports on GHG emissions resulting from 
waste; Bern, Switzerland, provides recycling information specifically for 
visitors and migrants; and Montevideo, Uruguay, provides guidance to 
households on how to request a waste bin (City of Yokohama n.d.; Hello 
Switzerland n.d.; City of Montevideo n.d.). 
Countries typically share information on national waste management statistics, 
legislation and policies, fees, and infrastructure such as landfills and 
transfer stations. Common platforms for information distribution include 
face-to-face interactions, signage, media, websites, periodic reports, mobile 
applications, physical booklets, and fliers. The city of Baltimore, United 
States, has even installed a trash collection machine with a humorous appearance 
in the city’s harbor to catch the attention of citizens (box 6.4). 
Box 6.4 Mr. Trash Wheel 
Mr. Trash Wheel is a trash interceptor in Baltimore, Maryland, United States, 
that picks up litter floating in the Inner Harbor of Baltimore (Waterfront 
Partnership of Baltimore n.d.). Its remarkable visual appearance builds public 
awareness of proper waste management. The instrument’s rotor is powered by 
water and solar energy, and it deposits floating waste into a dumpster behind 
the vessel using a moving conveyer belt. 
Source: Photo courtesy of Waterfront Partnership of Baltimore; additional permission 
required for reuse.



128

Citizen Feedback 
Governments benefit when citizens provide feedback on waste management 
services. Citizen feedback allows waste management agencies to 
measure satisfaction and trust, understand gaps in services, and make 
critical changes that benefit the population, the environment, and the 
economy. 
For example, in Morocco, five cities launched a Citizen Report Card 
program, covering 25 percent of Morocco’s urban population, to understand 
citizen satisfaction with waste operations. The results of the survey 
are used to evaluate whether private operators are performing well and to 
make decisions on renewing their contracts. In Maputo, Mozambique, 
MOPA is a digital platform accessible via phone, smartphone, and computer 
that allows citizens to report issues such as overflowing dumpsites 
(Vasdev and Barroca 2016). Citizens that provide feedback are notified 
once the issue is resolved. These forms of citizen engagement allow for a 
closed loop between public agencies and the community affected by services. 
The cities studied use a variety of channels to collect citizen feedback, 
including phone, website, email, social media, surveys, and physical 
handouts. Toronto’s online platform is detailed in case study 11 in 
chapter 7. 
Financial Incentives 
Financial incentives are a powerful tool for motivating sustained behavior 
change. Governments and organizations have used various mechanisms to 
tie financial incentives to participation in the waste management system. 
Financial incentives can be linked to source separation, waste collection, 
reduction in the volume of waste disposed of, and disposal according to 
designated locations and schedules. 
For example, in Ningbo, China, results-based financing is being used 
to encourage households in high-rise apartment complexes to separate 
organics and recyclables (Lee et al. 2014). The government saves money 
since less waste is landfilled and returns a portion of the savings as a 
financial incentive for citizens who separate their waste. In addition, 
some cities only charge citizens for the disposal of residual waste or set 
fees for mixed waste disposal that are higher than fees for recycling 
services. In Kitakyushu, Japan, the government provides compost bins 
to households and holds public composting seminars that thousands of 
citizens have attended. Managing organic waste at the household level 
is cheaper for Kitakyushu citizens than paying by volume for formal 
disposal services (Matsuo n.d.). 
Several organizations and companies have adopted the concept of personal 
rewards to encourage environmental engagement and change public 
behavior. There are websites where citizens can earn points for taking environmentally 
friendly actions, such as recycling or participating in a learning 
program, and then can use their points to earn discounts at stores or make 
donations to community organizations (Recyclebank, n.d.). 



129


Social Impacts of Waste Management and the Informal Sector 

The quality of solid waste management affects the urban poor in critical 
ways, with impacts on their health, housing quality, service access, and 
livelihoods. In urban low-income neighborhoods, up to two-thirds of 
solid waste is not collected (Baker 2012). In areas with poor service coverage, 
the incidence of diarrhea is twice as high and acute respiratory 
infections are six times higher than in areas with frequent waste collection 
(UN-Habitat 2010). Waste is often dumped or burned, releasing 
toxic airborne chemicals and liquid runoff that contaminates water 
sources (Akinbile and Yusoff 2011). The dumped waste can also be a 
source of food and shelter for rats, mosquitoes, and scavenging animals, 
which could carry diseases such as dengue fever. The homes closest to 
dumpsites are often those of vulnerable populations who make a living 
by scavenging for recyclables with a monetary value. Just as gaps in solid 
waste services disproportionately affect the poor, improvements in service 
delivery can dramatically improve the lives of vulnerable populations. 
Informal Sector in Solid Waste Management 
Informal waste recycling is a common livelihood for the urban poor in 
low- and middle-income countries. About 1 percent of the urban population, 
or more than 15 million people, earn their living informally in the 
waste sector (Medina 2010). In urban centers in China alone, about 
3.3 million to 5.6 million people are involved in informal recycling 
(Linzner and Salhofer 2014). 
Photo 6.2 Informal Recyclers in the Middle East and North Africa Region



130

Waste pickers are often a vulnerable demographic and are typically 
women, children, the elderly, the unemployed, or migrants. They generally 
work in unhealthy conditions, lack social security or health insurance, are 
subject to fluctuations in the price of recyclable materials, lack educational 
and training opportunities, and face strong social stigma. 
The data collected for this report revealed that in many places, the 
number of female waste pickers outnumbered the number of male waste 
pickers. For example, in Vientiane, Lao PDR, and Cusco, Peru, 50 percent 
and 80 percent of waste pickers are female, respectively (Keohanam 2017; 
Arenas Lizana 2012). Furthermore, many waste pickers are children who 
face greater risks to physical development and loss of education than 
adults. In Gjilan, Kosovo, about 40 percent of waste pickers at the local 
dumpsite are children (Kienast-Duyar, Korf, and Larsen 2017). 
When properly supported and organized, informal recycling can create 
employment, improve local industrial competitiveness, reduce poverty, and 
reduce municipal spending on solid waste management and social services 
(Medina 2007). UN-Habitat found that waste pickers commonly collect 
50–100 percent of waste in cities in low-income countries, at no cost to 
municipalities (UN-Habitat 2010). For example, waste pickers in Mumbai, 
India; Jakarta, Indonesia; and Buenos Aires, Argentina, are estimated to 
have an economic impact of more than US$880 million annually (Medina 
2007). In Jakarta, waste pickers are estimated to divert 25 percent of the 
city’s waste to productive use (Medina 2008). Some of the more successful 
interventions to improve waste pickers’ livelihoods are formalization and 
integration of waste pickers, strengthening of the recycling value chain, and 
consideration of alternative employment opportunities (box 6.5). 
Formalization and Integration of Waste Pickers 
Formalizing informal waste pickers could lead to improved waste collection 
and recycling. Because of the social stigma often associated with 
waste picking, political buy-in could allow for social inclusion in the 
solid waste sector. National regulations or guidelines can lead to systematic 
consideration of waste pickers at all levels of government such 
as in Brazil (box 6.6). However, local municipalities are most directly 
empowered to provide recognition and social benefits to waste pickers, 
such as through legal identification, housing, health, and education. 
Box 6.5 Waste Picker Cooperative Model: Recuperar 
Members of Recuperar, a cooperative in Medellin, Colombia, earn 1.5 times the 
minimum wage. They can receive loans from the cooperative, are affiliated with 
the Colombian system of socialized medicine, have opportunities to earn scholarships 
to continue their studies, and are provided with life and accident 
insurance. The members mainly collect mixed waste and recyclables and, in 
1998 alone, recovered 5,000 tonnes of recyclables (Medina 2005).



131

For instance, in Quezon City, the Philippines, approximately 3,000 
waste pickers work at the Payatas landfill (Gupta 2014). They are provided 
with formal identification and work in shifts to allow each worker 
to earn income from the recovery of recyclables. Child labor is also 
banned. In Morocco, as part of a World Bank project, the government 
requires private sector solid waste management operations to employ 
any waste pickers that previously worked on the site. A clause is 
included in contracts to hold operators accountable (World Bank 2016). 
One method governments can use to gain an understanding of the 
impact of the waste management system on multiple stakeholders is a 
social assessment (Bernstein n.d.). A social assessment analyzes several 
dimensions of the waste management system, from service quality to willingness 
to pay. Social assessments also address risks around informal 
labor, working conditions, and gender that are related to solid waste 
management. Insights from a social assessment can be used to improve the 
waste management system. In the study conducted for this book, 24 cities 
reported completion of a formal social assessment within the past five 
years, while 73 cities lacked a social assessment in the past five years. 
There is significant room for growth in cities’ awareness and analytical 
assessment of the informal sector given existing challenges (box 6.7). 
Box 6.6 Formalization of Waste Pickers in Brazil 
Brazil passed a comprehensive Solid Waste National Policy in 2010, which both 
recognized waste picking cooperatives as service providers and created mechanisms 
to integrate informal waste workers into the country’s formal system. 
The legislation’s focus was on establishing safe disposal systems, decreasing 
waste generation, and increasing reuse and recycling, all through the combined 
efforts of the government, private, and informal waste sectors. 
An overview of the legal framework in Brazil can be found at http://www 
.inclusivecities.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Dias_WIEGO_PB6.pdf.
Box 6.7 Challenges for Waste Pickers 
- In a study on waste pickers across five cities in Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America, 73 percent stated that lack of access to quality waste streams was 
a major or moderate problem (WIEGO 2014). 
- About 87 percent stated that unstable prices were a major or moderate 
problem, and 61 percent found it difficult to negotiate better prices from 
buyers. 
- In Bogota, Colombia, and Durban, South Africa, 80 percent of waste pickers 
said that harassment was a problem, 84 percent said they were treated 
poorly by local authorities, and 89 percent said that regulations and bylaws 
regarding waste are an issue. Some 97 percent identified social 
exclusion as a problem in their work. 



132

Strengthening of the Recycling Value Chain 
Waste pickers engage with the recycling value chain by collecting materials 
and selling them to middlemen who then clean and aggregate 
materials to distribute to industry. Governments and corporations can 
improve waste pickers’ income prospects by creating sanctions to 
ensure fair prices from middlemen, directly offering waste pickers a 
fair and consistent wage at deposit centers, or helping waste picker 
cooperatives establish direct contracts with large buyers of recyclables, 
such as bottle manufacturers. An innovative partnership model 
between the private sector and waste pickers in Mexico is detailed in 
box 6.8. 
Governments and nonprofits can also support waste pickers in 
forming organized cooperatives that provide a strong bargaining position 
with stakeholders (box 6.8). Micro and small enterprises and 
cooperatives help waste pickers increase the purchase price of their 
collected waste by negotiating with intermediaries and allow waste 
pickers to gain social recognition. There may also be opportunities to 
access infrastructure to provide additional value to the recyclables, 
such as baling or cleaning the materials. 
Formal recognition also allows informal workers to gain job stability 
and acknowledgement of their work. Cooperative members consistently 
report a higher standard of living as well as improvements in 
self-esteem and self-reliance than when they work independently. In 
addition, organized workers are more productive and are healthier 
when provided with guaranteed collection routes and safe working 
conditions outside of dumpsites. 
Box 6.8 Socially Responsible Plastics Recycling in Mexico 
In 2006, the World Bank Group’s International Finance Corporation (IFC) partnered 
with a Mexican company, PetStar, to finance a recycling plant that processes 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a common material in plastic bottles 
and food packaging. Because of low recycling rates in Mexico, sourcing a 
steady supply of raw PET from municipal recycling programs was not feasible. 
As a result, the project identified waste pickers as natural partners in collecting 
used PET products across the country. PetStar and the IFC worked together to 
generate socially responsible partnerships with waste picking communities that 
not only provided employment, but addressed issues with working conditions, 
organization and advocacy, and child labor. By partnering with the major beverage 
manufacturer Coca-Cola, PetStar found a guaranteed buyer for recycled 
plastic. This consistent revenue stream enabled PetStar to contract with informal 
workers at a fair, consistent wage. PetStar and the IFC’s unique, vertically 
integrated approach to recycling is not only profitable but socially responsible 
for waste pickers and the environment. 



133

Consideration of Alternative Employment Opportunities beyond 
Solid Waste Management 
Integrating waste pickers into the solid waste management system might 
not always be efficient or even preferred by waste pickers. If local recycling 
markets are weak or if the waste collection or sorting needs of the city do 
not require extensive labor, waste pickers might be more productively 
employed outside of the waste management system. Since waste pickers 
often lack skills for alternative livelihoods, external employment requires 
social support and vocational training to ensure a smooth transition. 
Job retraining or skill-building programs, in combination with social 
support programs such as in health care and child education, can support 
adult career transitions and minimize periods of vulnerability. Although the 
personalized attention and resources needed to support alternative livelihoods 
can be substantial, when provided properly, this support can help 
break the cycle of poverty for several future generations. An example of 
education reducing waste picking is that of the conditional cash transfer 
program, Bolsa Familia, in Brazil (Dias 2008; Medina 2007). It entailed 
giving a financial incentive to vulnerable families for sending their children 
to school and resulted in more than 40,000 children leaving waste picking 
to attend school. 



141





CHAPTER 7 
Case Studies 

1. A Path to Zero Waste in San Francisco, United States 
In 2002, San Francisco announced a vision to send zero waste to landfills 
by 2020. Through initiatives to promote recycling and composting, San 
Francisco is now one of the greenest cities in North America and a global 
leader in waste management (Economist Intelligence Unit 2011). 
San Francisco’s success has been achieved largely by robust public policy 
implemented by determined political leadership, strong public-private partnerships, 
resident education, and financial incentives for waste reduction. 
San Francisco was the first city in the United States to implement strict 
legislation about the use of or management of specific materials. The city 
prohibited the use of styrofoam and polystyrene foam in food service 
(2006), required mandatory recycling for construction debris (2007), 
banned plastic bags in drugstores and supermarkets (2009), and implemented 
mandatory recycling and composting for both residents and 
businesses (2009). San Francisco most recently also banned the sale of 
plastic water bottles in 2014 (EPA 2017). 
State-of-the-art outreach programs covering residences, businesses, 
schools, and events are widespread, and financial incentives encourage 
waste reduction and recycling. To help residents more clearly understand 
their waste disposal practices and financial impact, each house or building 
receives a detailed bill for waste management fees. Payments are reduced 
if residents shift their waste from mixed waste bins to ones designated for 
recycling or composting. Furthermore, the size of the provided mixed waste 
bins was halved and the size of recycling containers was doubled. Waste 
bins are regularly inspected, and households that fail to comply with policies 
first receive warnings, followed by a financial penalty. 



142

San Francisco also introduced the first and largest urban food waste 
composting collection program in the United States, covering both the 
commercial and residential sectors. San Francisco has collected more than 
a million tons of food waste, yard trimmings, and other compostable 
materials and turned these materials into compost for local farmers and 
wineries. 
As a result of its efforts, San Francisco achieved nearly 80 percent waste 
diversion in 2012—the highest rate of any major city in the United States 
(EPA 2017). 



143


2. Achieving Financial Sustainability in Argentina and Colombia 

A key challenge often faced by municipal solid waste management systems 
is a shortage of financial resources. This shortage is often caused by a lack 
of dedicated government funding, low fees that fail to fully cover costs, 
tariffs that are not enforced, and a shortage of data on the real cost of 
services. Argentina and Colombia are effectively achieving financial sustainability 
with the approaches discussed below: 
Financial Sustainability in Argentinean Municipalities 
As in many other Latin American countries, municipal governments in 
Argentina were not aware of real solid waste management costs because 
they did not have a standard methodology or accounting system for estimating 
them. Municipalities also generally did not charge fees for waste 
services and very little in the way of municipal funds was earmarked for 
solid waste management. 
Argentina quantified the total cost of its waste system to improve longterm 
sustainability. Under the World Bank–financed Integrated Solid Waste 
Management Project, the Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable 
Development (SAyDS)1 developed a tool known as the Integrated Urban 
Solid Waste Management Economic and Financial Matrix. This tool helps 
municipalities understand the real costs of services and value of investments. 
The tool analyzes each stage of the solid waste management value chain, 
identifies the proportion of costs recovered by fees, and identifies ways to 
reallocate budget resources to improve financial sustainability. 
The tool was made available to all municipalities in Argentina. Based on 
its deployment, SAyDS and the Ministry of Environment set the following 
goals for municipalities: 
- Calculation of all integrated solid waste management costs 
(figures 7.2.1–7.2.3) and identification of all associated revenues 
toward the goal of equilibrating waste management accounts 
- Development of potential new cost-recovery schemes and calculation 
of the associated fees using data 
- Implementation of the polluter-pays principle so that larger generators 
of waste pay more 
Through in-person and online trainings, 535 municipal and provincial 
staff were trained and municipalities covering 26 percent of the population 
collected financial data using the tool.2 
The municipalities of Mar del Plata, Rosario, Viedma, Concordia, and 
Posadas have implemented cost recovery systems using the financial matrix. 
Mar del Plata, a large coastal municipality, implemented a differentiated fee 
system across wealthy and poor neighborhoods after a broad communications 
campaign and outreach effort. Both the variable costs of the waste 
system and the operational costs of the landfill are covered. Rosario, on 



144

Figure 7.2.1 Cost Recovery by Generator in Argentina 
Figure 7.2.2 Urban Solid Waste Management Costs (US$) by Stage 



145

Figure 7.2.3 Urban Solid Waste Management by Spending Category in Argentina 
the other hand, applied a specific fee to large waste generators. Municipal 
networks have also been developed to share information and experiences, 
such as suppliers that provide superior goods and services or that offer 
more competitive costs, peer-to-peer advice on strategy and operations, and 
opportunities for technicians from municipalities to participate in personnel 
exchanges with other towns and facilities within their province. 
A key factor for implementation of the financial tool was having the 
necessary human and financial resources. SAyDS was fully staffed with 
qualified teams that could carry out outreach and capacity-building campaigns 
to provincial and municipal governments, tailor the training to specific 
needs of the local governments, and scale up the training nationwide. 
Through this success, municipalities built trust with the federal government 
and had the political support needed to improve cost recovery. 
The tool was complemented by support for an institutional framework 
developed by the Integrated Solid Waste Management Project that 



146

allowed for agile coordination between the municipal, provincial, and 
federal governments. 
Colombia’s Strategies for Cost Recovery 
In Colombia, the Regulatory Commission for Drinking Water and Basic 
Sanitation regulates public utilities involved in the distribution and 
processing of water and wastewater and also influences cost recovery 
for municipal solid waste systems. The commission established a 
national methodology for determining the maximum service fee that 
local service providers can charge to users. In 2016, the commission 
developed a formula that accounts for all costs in every step of the solid 
waste management system, including urban cleaning and sweeping, collection 
and transfer, final disposal, leachate management, and recycling 
(Correal 2016). This national framework enables municipalities to systematically 
recover their expenses and finance the services that they 
provide. In 2014, 84.5 percent of the sector’s revenues originated from 
the collection of fees (Correal 2015). 
An important success factor for this system is the involvement and 
authority of the central government. Through Article 370, the Colombian 
constitution assigns responsibility to the president for ensuring good 
administration and efficiency of public utilities through control, inspection, 
and surveillance. Law 142 allows municipal governments to recover 
the costs of local urban services. This legal infrastructure is complemented 
by the participation and involvement of stakeholders such as private 
contractors and recyclers. 
According to the Ministry of Housing, City and Territory, by implementing 
tariff systems, 891 out of 1,122 Colombian municipalities, or 
nearly 80 percent, managed to recover costs from user fees by 2013 (Correal 
2014). Colombia´s success in cost recovery through accounting, legal infrastructure, 
and institutional commitment can be replicated and adapted to 
other Latin American countries and regions around the world. 



147


3. Automated Waste Collection in Israel 

In 2012, a green neighborhood, Neot Rabin, was inaugurated in Israel’s 
historic city of Yavne (Cohen 2012). Neot Rabin houses the country’s 
first pneumatic waste collection system, which is also known as an automated 
vacuum collection (AVAC) system. Buildings with AVAC systems 
use a network of underground pipes to connect each residential unit with 
a centralized garbage storage unit. On each floor, residents dispose of 
waste in two garbage chutes: dry waste in one and wet waste in another. 
Garbage placed in these chutes is automatically directed to an underground 
storage unit. 
Once a week, waste from residential buildings is pumped or vacuumed 
through a pipe at speeds of between 50 and 80 kilometers per hour to an 
aggregated storage center. The waste is stored in sealed containers in preparation 
for sorting and compaction. Finally, waste is transferred to containers 
that are removed by truck and transported to final disposal sites. 
Based on the success of the pilot AVAC system in Neot Rabin, Yavne 
began replacing the municipality’s public trash bins with pneumatic bins in 
2014. As of 2015, about 30 pneumatic waste collection points were used in 
public areas, including parks, schools, and streets, providing immediate 
removal of waste from these spaces, eliminating waste-associated odor 
issues, and reducing traffic congestion. The municipalities of Ra’anana and 
Bat Yam also began assembling automated waste collection systems for 
residential buildings (Revolvy n.d.). 
However, AVAC has certain limitations, such as the high initial investment 
required for establishing the system, operational difficulties when 
pipes are blocked, workforce training, public willingness to engage in separate 
disposal, and challenges to collection of bulky and electronic waste 
(Nakou, Benardos, and Kaliampakos 2014). 



148


4. Cooperation between National and Local Governments for Municipal Waste Management in Japan 

Japan manages its waste through comprehensive governance and advanced 
technologies. Of the nearly 44 million tonnes of waste generated annually, 
only 1 percent is landfilled. The remainder is recycled or converted to 
energy in state-of-the-art waste-to-energy facilities. Japan’s efficient 
solid waste management practices can be largely attributed to effective 
cooperation between its national and local governments. The central and 
urban public authorities coordinate along several dimensions, from data 
collection to financing. 
Data Collection and Database Management 
Each year, the national Ministry of the Environment conducts an annual 
waste management survey. Local governments’ responses are aggregated 
in a comprehensive database that both national and local governments 
use to develop plans, strategies, and policies. Information surveyed 
includes the quantity of waste that is generated and the amount of waste 
disposed of via recycling, composting, and incineration. The materials 
recovery rates reported through the survey are disclosed to the public, 
which provides incentives to local governments to increase sustainable 
disposal practices. 
The transparent data system allows local governments to compare their 
plans and outcomes with those of other local governments that have 
similar economic and demographic profiles. Local governments use this 
Table 7.4.1 Cooperation of National and Local Governments in Japan on Municipal Solid Waste Management 



149

information to evaluate and continually improve their processes. Members 
of the public and academic organizations may also use the data to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the waste management system. 
In 2016, 1,741 municipalities and 578 special district authorities3 
completed the national survey. 
Municipal Solid Waste Management Planning 
All local governments in Japan are required to develop a local solid waste 
management plan that looks ahead about 10 years. To ensure consistency 
and thoroughness of local plans, the national government publishes guidelines 
for municipalities; these guidelines urge municipalities to detail their 
intended initiatives to sustainably treat waste and promote waste reduction, 
reuse, and recycling. All local governments comply with national 
laws and regulations, including the Air Pollution Control Act, the Soil 
Contamination Countermeasures Act, the Water Pollution Prevention Act, 
and the Act on Promotion of Private Finance Initiatives. 
Financial Support for Municipal Solid Waste Infrastructure 
The Japanese national government provides subsidies to municipalities 
to develop and improve waste treatment facilities based on the waste 
management plans submitted by local governments. Subsidies cover up 
to one-third of the cost of basic infrastructure projects, and for advanced 
facilities, such as high-efficiency waste-to-energy facilities, subsidies 
often cover half of project costs. The types of projects that are subsidized 
include recycling facilities, waste-to-energy plants, organic waste processing 
sites, septic tanks, landfills, refurbishing of waste treatment 
equipment, and extension of the lifespan of existing waste disposal 
facilities. 
The remaining capital costs are the responsibility of local governments. 
Generally, however, much of the remaining costs are financed by local 
bonds that are paid back through a local tax allocation transferred from the 
national government. Therefore, ultimately, about 60 percent of initial 
project costs are financially supported by the national government while the 
remaining 40 percent are managed by local governments. 
Operational costs for facilities are fully and directly covered by local 
governments. The two main revenue sources are the sale of designated plastic 
bags (a form of user fees in Japan) and general tax revenue. 
Information and Human Resource Exchange 
To promote connectivity and knowledge exchange between the national 
government and local governments, public officials and employees may 
take on roles in other levels of administration. There are also several mechanisms 
that allow local governments to report feedback to the national 
government, including the Japan Waste Management Association (JWMA), 
which includes 585 municipal governments, and the National Governors’ 
Association. For example, at the annual meeting of the JWMA, local 



150

Photo 7.1 Japanese Bins 
Photo 7.2 Japanese Recycling Facility
governments submit feedback that is aggregated by the JWMA and shared 
with national agencies, including the Ministry of the Environment. 
Japan’s coordination in key dimensions of waste management ensures 
that best practices are disseminated across the country, planning is conducted 
in a data-driven manner, and cities have sufficient financial and 
human resources to process waste in a most sustainable manner. 



151


5. Central Reforms to Stabilize the Waste Sector and Engage the Private Sector in Senegal 

Senegal produces more than 2.4 million tonnes of waste per year. However, 
about 1.08 million tonnes remains uncollected. Of the waste that is collected, 
most is disposed of at a central dump that is one of the 10 largest dumpsites in 
the world. The country, which faces a rapid urbanization rate of 2.5 percent 
each year, has strongly focused on modernizing its waste management sector 
and developing the urban services needed by its burgeoning city population. 
Although Senegal was interested in engaging the private sector to revitalize 
the waste management sector, it faced challenges typical of low- and 
middle-income countries related to transparency and difficulty in navigating 
the political system. Until 2015, waste management responsibilities were 
spread over several ministries, making coordination difficult. Furthermore, 
to invest in infrastructure and provide collection and disposal services, corporations 
require opportunities to recover costs. In Senegal, the lack of an 
established citizen payment system created financial gaps and led to payment 
delays that discouraged private entities. 
Recognizing the pressing need to revitalize the waste sector, Senegal turned 
to internal reforms. The national government established a single public 
entity to streamline all waste management planning and services, called 
L’Unité de Coordination de la Gestion des Déchets Solides, or the Waste 
Coordination Unit, in 2015. This organizational structure was sustained even 
as regimes changed, and the government now has a mix of public and private 
service provision. The government structured a realistic relationship by 
devolving responsibilities to the private sector that are affordable to both the 
capital, Dakar, and the country at large. This structure is complemented by 
reliable and stable public entities that will follow through on contracts. 
The waste management sector recovers 15 percent of operational costs, 
with the remaining 85 percent coming from the central government budget. 
Small, local private entities provide services from street cleaning to waste collection, 
and the government directly operates the remainder of the system. 
Waste is now collected daily in Dakar, streets are swept consistently, and 
most waste deposits have been cleaned up. The Waste Coordination Unit 
also began using media to communicate with citizens and optimized waste 
collection routes using web-based monitoring systems. They recruited young 
professionals to engage with modern technologies and implement progressive 
policies to ensure the long-term development of the waste sector. 
The success of the new management structure has revived the interest of 
potential investors, including international donors. 
The rapid improvement in waste service delivery in Senegal was made possible 
through radical changes in governance and improvements in technical 
capacity centrally. While Senegal has so far improved waste services without 
a traditional public-private partnership, the structural transformation in governance 
has created a more stable, attractive waste management sector for 
investors and waste management companies. 



152


6. Decentralized Organic Waste Management by Households in Burkina Faso 

In Burkina Faso, households historically managed waste through a traditional 
practice called tampouré. Tampouré involves storing organic waste 
in front of homes during the dry season and spreading the waste in fields 
before the first rains. The waste serves as a layer of nutritious compost and 
moisture-retaining mulch that improves agricultural production in areas 
of low productivity. 
Currently, cities in Burkina Faso are growing rapidly along with waste 
and demand for agricultural products. To address these growing needs, the 
Ministry of Agriculture launched a Manure Pit Operation in 2001 that is 
in many ways inspired by the traditional practice of tampouré. Under this 
system, the government encourages households to establish pits and compost 
on their own land. 
The government allocates funds each year to support household 
waste management. For example, between 2005 and 2012, the national 
government partnered with several development agencies to finance 
the construction of 15,000 manure pits in Burkina Faso’s eastern 
region. 
Currently, about 2 million tonnes of organic fertilizer is produced 
annually and used by farmers each year. A 2016 World Bank study 
revealed that 40 percent of the total waste produced by households in 
secondary cities and peri-urban areas in Burkina Faso was directly processed 
onsite (Banna 2017). This figure is remarkably high when compared 
with other parts of the African continent. 
Burkina Faso’s decentralized waste management system has significantly 
reduced the burden on the formal waste collection and disposal 
infrastructure. Its agricultural benefits have also led to increased food 
security and have created opportunities for citizens to generate income 
from waste. 



153


7. Eco-Lef: A Successful Plastic Recycling System in Tunisia 

Tunisia provides an example of successful integration of the informal 
recycling sector into waste management and of the application of the 
extended producer responsibility principle. In 1997, the Ministry of 
Environment launched a national program, Eco-Lef,4 to address the significant 
issue of postconsumer packaging waste. The Eco-Lef program 
developed a national system for the recovery and recycling of postconsumer 
packaging primarily focused on plastic waste. 
The Eco-Lef program is governed by a decree that specifies the methods 
required for the collection and management of bags and packaging waste 
(Republic of Tunisia 1997). The program is partly financed by the private 
sector through an eco-tax of 5 percent on the net added value of certain 
locally manufactured or imported plastic polymers.5 The National Agency 
for Waste Management (ANGed) is responsible for administering the Eco- 
Lef program. 
The Eco-Lef program has successfully improved postconsumer 
packaging collection and recycling rates. The system encourages 
individual and informal collectors to gather used plastic and metal 
packaging and deliver the materials to Eco-Lef collection centers. In 
return, waste collectors receive remuneration based on the type and 
quantity of packaging collected. There is a financial advantage for participating 
in the Eco-Lef system: prices for plastic packaging waste in a 
local market are about 500 dinars per tonne (US$208 per tonne) compared 
to 700 dinars per tonne (US$290/tonne) at Eco-Lef collection 
centers. 
The system has an annual budget of US$5.8 million for 2018, and 
currently operates through 221 Eco-Lef collection centers, 41 of which are 
managed by ANGed and the remainder managed by the private sector 
(ANGed and Ministry of Social Affairs and Environment 2018). The centers 
have collected more than 150,000 tonnes of plastic packaging waste 
since the program’s launch in 2001. Depending on the type of plastic, 
70–90 percent of collected waste is recycled through more than 70 active 
private recyclers who receive plastic collected through the Eco-Lef system. 
Eco-Lef has contributed to the creation of about 18,000 jobs and 2,000 
micro-enterprises for collection with the financial support of the National 
Employment Fund, a government fund that helps vulnerable populations 
find employment. 
The Eco-Lef experience provides several key lessons: 
- The extended producer responsibility principle can create a financially 
sustainable system for the collection, transportation, and recycling of 
materials. 
- Government support in connection to legal, institutional, and operational 
activities is critical to the development of a recycling value 
chain. 



154

Photo 7.3 Eco-Lef Workers Collecting and Weighing Packaging 
Waste at the Montplaisir Collection Center in Tunis, Tunisia 
- Long-term ownership and management of the recycling system by the 
private sector can result in greater financial sustainability and operational 
efficiency. 
- Integration of informal waste pickers into formal waste management 
operations can contribute to the success of recycling initiatives. 



155


8. Extended Producer Responsibility Schemes in Europe 

The European Union (EU) has integrated extended producer responsibility 
principles into its policies for more than 25 years (bio by Deloitte). The EPR 
landscape in the EU encompasses a large variety of schemes with different 
financial and technical configurations. Four EU directives set guidelines for 
specific waste streams, including packaging, end-of-life vehicles, batteries, and 
electronic equipment. Member states have the flexibility to develop specific 
regulations and operational mechanisms within EU guidelines (table 7.8.1). 
Collective vs. Individual Compliance Schemes 
Under the EU’s EPR framework, producers may choose between a collective 
compliance scheme or an individual scheme. Under a collective scheme, 
individual legal obligations are outsourced to umbrella-type organizations, 
such as producer responsibility organizations (PROs). PROs are created to 
support producers in the handling of the technical, financial, and policy 
aspects of managing product life cycles. PROs receive financial contributions 
from industry and members and use these proceeds to recycle goods, 
manage data, conduct operations, facilitate contracting, and communicate 
with stakeholders. Under an individual scheme, producers that cater to a 
specific geography or that generate most of their waste close to the production 
site will manage waste directly, such as through a take-back program 
in which consumers can return used materials to the distributor. 
The EU experience reveals that the most expensive schemes are not necessarily 
the best ones. Factors such as population density, citizen awareness, 
local laws, and legal frameworks also affect EPR performance. Furthermore, 
a country must consider recyclers in the informal market since formal EPR 
mechanisms reduce opportunities for them to collect materials. 
Designing and implementing an EPR scheme involves a range of technical, 
financial, institutional, and legal considerations. A 2014 analysis of EU EPR 
Table 7.8.1 Number of European Union Member States Implementing Extended Producer Responsibility Schemes in 2013 



156

schemes identified four key pillars of success: (1) distribution of responsibilities 
across stakeholders, (2) recovery of true costs, (3) fair competition between 
PROs and operators, and (4) transparency by EPR schemes in reporting and 
transparency by the government in monitoring (bio by Deloitte 2014). 
Distribution of responsibilities: Financial responsibility for a product’s life 
cycle will often be borne by producers while the recycling programs themselves 
are operated by municipalities. At other times, producers will take a 
direct role in managing waste and contracting with private recyclers. 
Recovery of true costs: EPR schemes must account for the costs of source 
segregation, collection, treatment, enforcement, and operation of the EPR 
program. In some cases, the amount that producers pay municipalities to 
recycle waste may depend on the final revenue generated in secondary materials 
markets, as is the case with the lubricant oil market in Germany. 
Governments may consider rewarding good product design with lower producer 
fees. In France, for example, graphic paper fees are calculated based 
on recyclability and other technical criteria. Finally, EPR profitability is tied 
to the performance of the secondary materials market, and legislators should 
plan EPR systems to be resilient across varying recycling markets. 
Fair competition: A strong EPR system allows for competition between 
PROs and waste management operators. Competition encourages improvements 
in efficiency and reduces monopolies. Service operators should be 
procured using transparent procedures and competitive open tenders. PROs 
may be for-profit or nonprofit organizations, and are often owned by industry 
investors, such as within the battery industry in Austria and Denmark. 
An EPR system with free competition between PROs requires an independent 
body to verify compliance, centralize and aggregate performance 
reports, and ensure fair competition for all actors. 
Transparency and monitoring: Monitoring the performance of an EPR 
system requires clear performance metrics such as unit costs and impact of 
the design on recycling activities. Metrics allow governments to compare the 
performance of different EPR schemes and support the replicability of good 
practices. EPR systems must also be monitored to reduce corruption, prevent 
lack of action, ensure that all waste is fully reported, optimize collection and 
treatment operations, and stay attuned to PRO activities and compliance. For 
example, Austria uses a two-tiered audit system to ensure the effective management 
of end products. Governmental authorities audit PROs, and PROs 
audit collection and treatment operators. Collective schemes can also be 
audited by their members. 
EPR systems should adapt as new products are designed to ensure high 
recycling rates, minimal costs, and a strong transition to a circular economy. 
Examples of producers’ responsibilities within EPR schemes in the EU 
are as follows: 
- Simple financial responsibility schemes in the United Kingdom, where 
producers are financing waste management operations 
- Financial responsibility and partial organizational responsibility 
in Belgium, where producers provide financial compensation to 



157

municipalities for collection while other activities, such as sorting, are 
fully managed within the private sector 
- Full organizational responsibility where producers are contracting 
with private operators (electronic waste in France) or directly operating 
through collection and treatment of products (packaging waste in 
Germany) 
In addition to operational, data management, and communication costs, 
fees might also cover the following: 
- Contribution to a prevention fund (Austria, Belgium, and Czech Republic) 
- Additional costs registered by municipalities such as use of public 
space or cleaning of container areas (Germany) 
- Research and development programs or waste prevention activities 
(Austria, France, and Portugal) 
- Litter prevention programs (Netherlands, Belgium) 
Varying EPR models for treatment of end products include the following: 
- Packaging waste: Direct management of end-products by producer 
(Czech Republic, France) or outsourcing to several PROs (7 in Austria, 
10 in Germany, 39 in the United Kingdom) 
- End-of-life vehicles and oils: Direct management of end products by 
producer (Germany) but more commonly outsourced to a single PRO 
(Finland, Italy, Portugal) 
- Electrical and electronic equipment and batteries: Outsourced to a 
single PRO (the Netherlands, the Czech Republic) or several PROs 
(Austria, Denmark, the United Kingdom) 
Photo 7.4 An Automated Bottle Deposit Machine 



158


9. Financially Resilient Deposit Refund System: The Case of the Bottle Recycling Program in Palau 

Palau is a small country in the North Pacific with a population of 21,000 
in 2015 (UN DESA 2014). Palau’s economy relies on tourism visits to its 
famed Rock Islands and impressive diving sites. As of 2016, Palau received 
about 12,500 visitors per month. 
Waste collection is coordinated within each state and waste disposal is 
the responsibility of the national Solid Waste Management Office of the 
Bureau of Public Works, which manages the M-dock semi-aerobic landfill, 
the country’s largest landfill, situated in the capital city, Koror. Financially, 
solid waste management is funded entirely by the government. Although 
households and institutions are required to segregate waste streams, including 
for various recyclables and food waste, user fees are not charged or 
imposed on residents and businesses for waste collection and disposal, with 
the exception of a beverage container recycling program. 
Solid waste generation is an increasing problem in Palau because of 
booming tourism and an increasing local population. Palau’s waste system 
is inundated with food waste and plastics, composing 26 percent and 
32 percent of waste, respectively. Tourism generates a large volume of beverage 
containers, and as an island state, plastic waste would overwhelm 
Palau if it is not addressed properly. 
Palau’s Beverage Container Recycling Program 
In response to increasing plastic waste, the national government passed the 
Beverage Container Recycling Regulation in October 2006 to establish a 
national recycling program. The program is overseen by three main agencies: 
the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the Ministry of Public Infrastructures, 
Industries and Commerce (MPIIC), and the Koror State Government. 
The MOF manages the recycling fund, the MPIIC implements the recycling 
program, ensures sustainability, and identifies opportunities to export redeemed 
containers, and the Koror State Government operates a redemption center. 
Palau’s beverage recycling system addresses containers that are 32 ounces 
and smaller. The national government levies a US$0.10 deposit fee to consumers 
for plastic, glass, and metal containers, which are typically imported. 
When a container is returned to a redemption center, US$0.05 are returned 
to the customer, US$0.025 are channeled to Koror State, and the remaining 
US$0.025 are given to the national government to cover administrative costs. 
The program began with a 6-month fundraising period to ensure 
operational sustainability during which beverage containers were taxed but 
the refund program was not yet in operation. This initial effort led to more 
than US$659,000 in revenue and funded the initial phases of the refund program. 
Through the program’s full operation from 2011 to 2016, the national 
government earned US$2.2 million and refunded US$3.9 to customers by 
recovering more than 88 million imported containers. Through this system, 



159

Photo 7.5 Compacting Beverage Containers inside the Plant in Palau
about 8 percent of beverage containers were removed from the waste stream. 
In addition, about 98 percent of aluminum containers were recycled. 
Furthermore, about US$12,000 in operational costs were saved by diverting 
the containers from the M-dock semi-aerobic landfill. Collected beverage 
containers are shipped to Taiwan, China, for further processing. 
The program has provided a variety of benefits. The national government 
has used profits to purchase heavy equipment to fix the slope of the M-dock 
semi-aerobic landfill, preventing a potential landslide of the waste. Koror 
State has used proceeds to buy balers and other equipment to improve the 
efficacy of the redemption center. The program has also provided employment 
to individuals who collect containers from other states. 
Enabling Environment 
Palau’s beverage recycling program serves as a model for island countries 
that face limited space for waste management facilities and that possess 
sensitive natural environments. The program has operated sustainably 
because of the following factors: 
- Strong national government oversight: The Recycling Act of 2006 
effectively mandated a disposal fee for beverage containers. Because it 
is an island, the government maintains strong control over the entry of 



160

goods across its borders, which makes the program easier to monitor 
and manage. 
- Effective financial incentives: The US$0.05 that residents are paid 
for each redeemed container makes the program sufficiently attractive 
to the public. The program has virtually removed used containers 
from the streets. 
- High public participation: The key to the sustained operation of 
Palau’s bottle recycling program is strong public support. Palauans 
realize the value of preserving their environment and the economic 
value of tourism. 
- Collaboration between Palau’s national government and Koror State: 
National and local collaboration in Palau was made possible by clear 
delineation of roles and responsibilities. 



161


10. Improving Waste Collection by Partnering with the Informal Sector in Pune, India 

The city of Pune has significantly advanced its solid waste management by 
entering into a public-private partnership with the organization SWaCH 
(Solid Waste Collection and Handling or, officially, SWaCH Seva Sahakari 
Sanstha Maryadit, Pune). SWaCH is India’s first self-owned cooperative of 
waste pickers and other urban poor. In 2008, Pune Municipal Corporation 
(PMC) signed a five-year memorandum of understanding that gave SWaCH 
responsibility for collecting source-separated waste from households and 
commercial establishments, depositing the waste at designated collection 
points, and charging a user fee. The agreement also authorized waste collectors 
to retrieve and sell recyclables from aggregated waste. 
Pune generates about 1,500–1,600 tonnes of solid waste per day. SwaCH 
provides door-to-door waste collection services to more than 500,000 
households in the city and covers 60 percent of the geographical area. The 
remaining 40 percent not covered by SwaCH’s collection operations either 
receive waste collection services directly from the city or dispose of waste in 
the city’s community bins. The SwaCH door-to-door collection partnership 
has saved PMC about 510 million Indian rupees (about US$7.9 million) 
each year and has reduced carbon emissions significantly through reduced 
truck usage. In 2016, the agreement between PMC and SwaCH was 
renewed for another five years. 
Overview of the Public-Private Partnership 
Through the arrangement with PMC, 2,688 SwaCH members collect segregated 
waste from households, institutions, and businesses. Waste collectors 
sort dry waste in sheds provided by PMC and retrieve recyclables 
such as paper, glass, and plastic. Waste collectors retain all income from 
the sale of reclaimed materials, and in 2016 SwaCH diverted 50,000 
tonnes of waste to recycling. 
The door-to-door collection program was introduced first through a 
pilot in apartment complexes in wealthy areas, where citizens were highly 
aware, and had a willingness to pay, and were politically supportive of the 
initiative. The success of the pilot created demand in other areas of the 
city. Awareness initiatives, including rallies, one-on-one meetings, and 
political endorsement by local councilors, further generated support. 
SWaCH members collect monthly user fees ranging from INR 10 to INR 
40 (US$0.15–US$0.6) per household and INR 100 (US$1.5) per commercial 
entity for waste collection services. PMC partially subsidizes collection 
costs in slums so that households pay about INR 5 (US$0.07) per month. 
The total estimated cost of collection to the city is one of the lowest in India, 
at about INR 4.38 per month (US$0.06) in 2015. 
SWaCH members also treat organic waste. Members are trained to operate 
biogas plants and to compost waste. To encourage citizens to treat 
waste at the source, PMC rebates 5 percent of property taxes to institutions 



162

that compost their own organic waste. Many of these institutions hire 
SWaCH members to collectively compost about 10 tonnes of waste per 
day. SWaCH members also operate biomethanation plants through buildoperate-
transfer contracts with the city. 
Because the SwaCH model is based on customer satisfaction, the service 
provider is directly accountable to the user and has incentives to provide 
quality services. The service provider is entitled to collection of 
waste dumped outside of homes, which encourages user compliance. 
PMC conducts individual consultations with households to gain user support 
and levies penalties on users who fail to provide payment for 
services. 
To provide financial resilience to the public-private partnership, PMC 
provides an ongoing annual grant to SWaCH that covers management and 
training costs, awareness-generation programs, and welfare benefits for 
members of SWaCH. The grant does not cover the salaries of collectors. 
Through the partnership with SWaCH, Pune has offered sustainable and 
efficient daily waste collection services to residents while improving the livelihoods 
of waste collectors within the city. 



163


11. Improving Waste Management through Citizen Communication in Toronto, Canada 

Toronto, Canada, uses citizen engagement to build a foundation for a more 
efficient solid waste management system. A multipronged communication 
strategy has been critical for reaching various residential audiences. Toronto 
has launched a detailed, interactive website that educates residents on garbage 
reduction, reuse, and recycling (City of Toronto 2018a). Waste management 
information that is relevant to citizens, such as source-separation 
guidelines, drop-off points, city regulations, and disposal rates and fees, are 
readily available on the site in a user-friendly, attractive manner. 
Within the online platform, residents can use the Waste Wizard tool to 
understand how and on what day any item should be disposed of and when 
(figure 7.11.1). For instance, a search for items such as “pencil” and 
“clothes” yields advice on donating items in good condition wherever possible 
and disposing of the items in a garbage bin as a final option. A search 
for “plastic chair” results in guidance to place oversized items two feet 
away from the garbage bin on the next scheduled collection day (City of 
Toronto 2018b). 
Toronto also actively uses social media to reach a wide audience. For 
instance, YouTube videos explain garbage to kids in a fun and simple way.6 
Videos are also available in foreign languages to reach growing populations 
living in multifamily homes, where recycling and composting rates (at 
27 percent) are relatively lower than in single-family homes (at 65 percent) 
(McKay 2016). 
Figure 7.11.1 Screenshot of Waste Wizard on the City of Toronto Website



164

Other successful initiatives to engage residents include a waste collection 
schedule mobile application and the 3Rs Ambassador Program, in 
which volunteers are trained to educate fellow residents on sustainable 
practices in waste reduction, reuse, and recycling. In 2016, the Mayor’s 
Towering Challenge was organized to recognize notable reduce and reuse 
initiatives led by city residents. Toronto is currently focusing on applying 
these excellent communication strategies to implementation of its Long- 
Term Waste Strategy to achieve zero waste in the next 30 to 50 years. 



165


12. Managing Disaster Waste 

Depending on their nature and severity, disasters can create large volumes of 
debris ranging from 5 to 15 times the annual waste generation rates of 
the affected community (Reinhart and McCreanor 1999; Basnayake, 
Chiemchaisri, and Visvanathan 2006). The financial cost of managing disaster 
waste following a major event is also spiraling and has crossed the billion dollar 
mark in recent years (Thummarukudy 2012). For instance, after Hurricane 
Katrina, the cost of handling the disaster debris exceeded US$4 billion in a 
recovery effort that lasted more than three years (UNEP 2012). 
The nature and composition of disaster waste differs based on the type 
of disaster and the built environment that has been affected. In most cases, 
the bulk of disaster waste is construction and demolition material such as 
concrete, steel, and wood. Disaster waste may also include natural debris 
such as trees, mud and rocks, food waste, damaged vehicles and boats, 
hazardous waste, and municipal waste. 
With climate change modifying the frequency and intensity of many 
weather-related hazards (IPCC 2014), efficient, effective, and low-impact 
recovery is crucial (Brown 2015). If managed well, disaster waste can 
provide valuable resources for the postdisaster recovery and rebuilding 
process, generate income, and offset the use of virgin natural resources 
(Brown, Milke, and Seville 2011). Disaster waste can then be recycled, disposed 
of, used to generate energy, or repurposed for land reclamation and 
engineering fill (Brown 2015). Managing disaster waste well can help public 
agencies avoid future liabilities and costs, such as by recompacting 
unstable dumpsites or by cleaning up contaminated soil. Disaster waste is 
typically managed in three phases, detailed in table 7.12.1. 
Japan is considered one of the most disaster-prepared countries in the 
world, and its plans and abilities were put to use in recent years (UNEP 2012). 
Table 7.12.1 Typical Phases of Disaster Waste Management 



166

Photo 7.6 Recovery Efforts after Meethotamulla Dumpsite Collapse from Heavy Rains in Colombo, Sri Lanka
In March 2011, a massive earthquake off the Pacific coast triggered a tsunami 
and damaged the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, leading to the 
release of radioactive materials and the evacuation of thousands of people. 
Damages were estimated at more than US$210 billion, marking one of the 
most economically devastating disasters in history. 
Japan’s Ministry of the Environment formed a task force consisting of 
more than 100 experts from government agencies, research institutions, 
academia, and industry. Two months after the event, the Ministry of the 
Environment developed clear guidance notes for municipalities on dealing 
with disaster debris. The guidelines emphasized the importance of maximizing 
recycling opportunities and using local employment in recovery. 
Recognizing that many municipalities would be unable to handle the volume 
of disaster debris without assistance, the guidelines promoted collaboration 
between prefectures and jurisdictions. Additional funding was 
provided. These measures ensured consistency in the overall approach to 
the clean up, segregation, offsite transportation, and final disposal of debris. 
Most middle- and lower-income countries that struggle to manage normal 
waste streams on a routine basis experience deeper crises after natural 
disasters. For instance, following the massive earthquake of April 25, 2015, 
in Nepal, waste accumulated in streets for several weeks. During that time, 
the need for clear guidelines for handling hazardous constituents such as 
paints and heavy metals became clear (UNEP 2015). 
Over the past two decades, disaster waste management has been a growing 
focus of international policy-making and advisory efforts. Several guidance 
frameworks for public authorities have been developed, including 
Disaster Waste Management Guidelines developed by the Swedish Civil 
Contingencies Agency and the United Nations in 2011 (Joint UNEP/OCHA 
Environment Unit 2011). 



167



13. Minimizing Food Loss and Waste in Mexico 

In Mexico, more than 50 percent of waste is organic, a large share of which 
originates from food loss and waste (food loss and waste). Food loss occurs during the 
production, storage, and distribution of food products, and food waste 
occurs when consumable food is thrown away. Of the many environmental 
consequences associated with food loss and waste, a major impact is its contribution to 
greenhouse gas emissions (FAO 2013). In Mexico, conservative estimates 
from the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (2015) state that 
by 2020 the solid waste sector, including food loss and waste, will be the fifth-largest source 
of greenhouse gas emissions in the country. 
In 2016, the quantity, magnitude, and composition, as well as the environmental, 
social, and economic impacts of food loss and waste in Mexico were comprehensively 
measured and assessed through a study supported by the World 
Bank (Aguilar Gutiérrez 2016). The study led to a legal reform that provided 
incentives for food donation and a call for the development of a 
national strategy. The following findings emerged from the study conducted 
in Mexico, and likely reflect similar situations in other countries in 
the region: 
- More than 35 percent of total annual food production is lost or wasted 
at an annual economic cost of more than US$25 billion per year, or 
more than 2.5 percent of GDP. 
- Greenhouse gas emissions from food loss and waste are at least equal to that produced 
by 14 million cars per year. 
- The estimated water loss associated with food loss and waste is 39 billion liters per 
year. 
- Estimated food loss and waste in Mexico amounts to more than 20.4 million 
tonnes per year. The largest share of food loss occurs at the production 
stage, specifically during distribution and wholesale, while the 
largest share of food waste occurs at distribution centers and urban 
centers. 
- More than 11 million people are living in extreme poverty in Mexico, 
often suffering from food insecurity, undernourishment, and malnourishment. 
The quantity of food loss and waste exceeds the food requirements of this 
population. 
Food Banks Are a Key Part of the food loss and waste Solution 
The Mexican Food Banking Network (Mexican Food Banking Network) is a key organization 
responsible for promoting the reduction of food loss and waste in the public and private 
sector’s agenda and for motivating the recovery and channeling of food to 
combat hunger (Mexican Food Banking Network 2015). Mexican Food Banking Network began its operations as a nonprofit 
organization in 1995 to recover food to fight hunger and improve nutrition 
for vulnerable populations in Mexico. 
One in four Mexicans suffers from food shortages and undernourishment, 
and since its inception, Mexican Food Banking Network has effectively helped this 



168

Photo 7.7 Organic Waste Bin in Mexico City, Mexico
vulnerable population while substantially reducing food loss and waste. Mexican Food Banking Network was 
one of the founding entities of the Global FoodBanking Network, an 
organization comprising 792 food banks in 32 countries. The Global 
FoodBanking Network is the second-largest network after that of the 
United States. Mexican Food Banking Network is a key civil society organization in Mexico 
(World Bank 2016). 
Mexican Food Banking Network leads food rescue efforts resulting in savings of more than 
120,000 tonnes annually and has benefited more than 1,137,000 people. It 
also purchases about 8,000 tonnes of food per year to achieve nutritional 
balance in the food donated to social causes. 
In addition to supporting Mexico’s efforts to fulfill the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 (specifically, Goal 12.3 for 



169

Responsible Consumption and Production), Mexican Food Banking Network has also been a key 
advocate for several policies and legal proposals: 
- In 2000, Mexico’s General Law of Health was modified to encourage 
food donation. 
- An amendment to the Income Tax Law provides tributary benefits to 
companies that donate their products five days before the expiration 
date.7 
- As part of a presidential decree, companies that make food donations 
to food banks only receive an additional 5 percent fiscal incentive. 
food loss and waste and hunger are improving in Mexico as effective food banks are 
complemented by support from the government, the private sector, and 
international agencies. 



170


14. Sustainable Source Separation in Panaji, India 

Panaji is the capital of the state of Goa in southwest India, with a metropolitan 
area population of 114,759 according to the Census of India in 
2011. Panaji is known for its strong cultural heritage and as a popular 
tourist destination, with colorful villas, hillside developments, and 
Portuguese influence. After the city’s only landfill was closed in 2005, and 
faced with a vulnerable natural ecosystem and strong tourism economy, 
the city turned to sustainable practices. Source separation was the first 
step toward the vision of a landfill-free city, and today Panaji serves as a 
role model in solid waste management. 
Source Separation Overview 
Panaji generated 50 tonnes of waste daily in 2017. Residential waste is 
source separated into five streams through a system of colored bins: 
- Green bins: Wet waste 
- Black or grey bins: Glass and metals 
- Pink bins: Paper and cartons 
- Orange bins: Plastics 
- White bins: Nonrecyclables 
The City Corporation of Panaji provides door-to-door collection of 
waste. Wet waste is collected from households every day, and dry waste is 
collected twice a week. Household wet waste is composted at one of 
96 decentralized compost units, whereas wet waste from commercial establishments 
is treated using windrow composting at two bulk processing 
units, and it is used for urban horticulture projects. In some cases, wet waste 
from hotels is digested onsite to produce biogas. In total, the city processes 
about 24 tonnes of wet waste daily. 
After collection, the city’s dry waste is stored and aggregated at one of 
12 sorting units. From there, the dry waste is further segregated into 
20 different streams at one of two Material Recycling Facilities. Each 
day, about 4 tonnes of dry waste is sent to a cement processing plant in 
Wadi, Karnataka, and 3 tonnes of recyclables are auctioned to vendors. 
In 2016, about US$22,000 in revenue was generated from the sale of 
recyclables. 
Hazardous waste, such as batteries and tube lights, is also separated and 
processed at a specialized treatment facility. 
Success Factors 
The success of Panaji’s source separation program can be attributed to strong 
public engagement, financial management, and institutional commitment. 
- Public engagement: The city promoted sustainable waste practices 
through a public campaign called “Bin Free in 2003.” The city engaged 
local students, celebrities, business leaders, and neighborhood civic 



171

Photo 7.8a and b Sorting Center at Residential Colony in Panaji, 
India 
Photo 7.8c Decentralized Composting Units in Panaji, India 



172

bodies to promote source segregation. As part of the campaign, the 
city spearheaded cultural programs ranging from music festivals to 
carnivals to encourage citizens to take responsibility for city cleanliness. 
Finally, the city launched a program called “Waste Wise” in all 
schools to promote waste segregation and to provide incentives for 
environmentally friendly behavior. 
- Pilot design: The city’s source separation program was first launched 
at a pilot scale covering only 70 households and two waste streams, 
one for dry waste and one for wet waste. 
- Enforcement mechanisms: To encourage citizen engagement, the city 
removed all community waste bins, which required households to 
manage their waste privately. Simultaneously, the city introduced a 
door-to-door collection program through which households must personally 
hand their waste to collectors. Paid sanitation workers inspect 
waste, and a combination of the personal exchange with households 
and formal daily monitoring motivates compliance. 
- Financial management: The City Corporation of Panaji has achieved 
financial sustainability for the solid waste program through fees 
and recycling revenues. The city established a new sanitation fee 
for households as well as a higher commercial fee for institutions. 
Households are charged a flat fee of INR 500 (US$7.3) for door-todoor 
collection in combination with the property tax, and commercial 
entities are charged between INR 600 (US$8.7) and INR 11,000 
(US$16). User fees are strongly enforced with penalties. Some remaining 
costs are subsidized by city funds. 
- Institutional commitment and responsiveness: The city government 
formed a new Solid Waste Management department that is overseen 
by a Waste Management Officer. The program also created a centralized 
complaint redress system, which includes a 24- hour helpline for 
unattended garbage and a dedicated vehicle to quickly respond to 
urgent waste situations. Finally, the city ensured that workers were 
provided with healthy and safe working conditions.



173


15. Musical Garbage Trucks in Taiwan, China 

Three decades ago, the waste disposal system in Taiwan, China, looked 
nothing like it does today. Garbage collection spots were overflowing, 
smelly, and infested with rats and insects. Most waste was disposed of in 
dumpsites. In the late 1980s, the Taiwanese government decided to revitalize 
its waste system by implementing strict guidelines and regulations 
and promoting recycling. A circular economy emerged as a new guiding 
principle. 
Today, Taiwan, China is a leader in recycling, with its Environmental 
Protection Administration reporting a 55 percent recycling rate in 
2015. A key component of its comprehensive strategy is motivating 
community involvement through popular “musical” garbage trucks 
(Shen n.d.). 
On this small, densely populated island, most families live in apartments 
and do not have communal garbage bins close to their homes. 
Within their households, residents are required to separate their waste 
into three categories—general (or nonrecyclable) waste recyclables, and 
food waste. Purchase of a blue City of Taipei garbage bag for general 
refuse is also compulsory in the capital. These bags are available at most 
corner stores and come in differently priced sizes, ranging from 3 to 
120 liters. Recycling, on the other hand, is free. This encourages citizens 
to recycle and produce less trash. 
At night, garbage trucks alert people to their arrival with high-pitched, 
familiar tunes, such as Beethoven’s “Für Elise.” Residents gather on the 
streets with their bags of general waste and throw them into the yellow 
musical trucks. Three times a week, recyclables are collected in a separate 
white pickup truck that follows the yellow garbage truck. Volunteers and 
officials stand on the back of the truck to help citizens sort their recyclables 
correctly (Bush 2017). This way, trash is delivered straight from home to 
truck without ever touching the ground. 
The trucks run on a regular schedule so residents are ready with their 
bags of waste when the curbside melodies begin. In the capital, Taipei, there 
are more than 4,000 pickup spots over five nights each week. Residents can 
receive alerts on nearby stops via mobile phone applications. 
Once collected, most general waste is incinerated, raw food waste is 
converted to fertilizer for farmers, cooked food waste is used as livestock 
feed, and recyclables are sorted and recycled. Public authorities monitor compliance 
using video cameras and financially reward citizens that report misbehavior. 
Violators are fined and may be publicly chastised for their offense.



174


16. The Global Tragedy of Marine Litter 

Across the world, beaches and waterways scattered with litter are an 
increasingly common sight and this marine litter has serious impacts on 
the environment, public health, and the economy. 
Marine litter comes in all shapes and sizes and, depending on the material, 
could be damaging to human health. Some 90 percent of floating 
marine debris is plastic, of which nearly 62 percent is food and beverage 
packaging (Galgani, Hanke, and Maes 2015; Consultic 2013). Although 
plastics have been mass-produced for only about 60 years, they persist in 
open waters for decades and even centuries (Andrady 1994). Even plastics 
designed to be biodegradable may not fully decompose since they depend 
on factors such as exposure to light, oxygen, and temperature (Swift and 
Wiles 2004), which are scarce in ocean depths. Smaller particles of plastic 
from manufacturing processes could also be difficult to account for and 
nearly impossible to extract. 
Marine litter can be land- or sea-based and often results from poor solid 
waste management practices. An estimated 80 percent of marine litter originates 
from land-based sources such as mismanaged dumps and landfills, storm 
water discharge, sewage, industrial facilities, and coastal tourism (Arcadis 
2014; McIlgorm, Campbell, and Rule 2008). Waste may also be transported 
to the ocean from inland rivers. In 2010, an estimated 32 million tonnes of 
plastic waste were mismanaged in coastal areas, allowing between 4.8 and 
12.7 million tonnes of plastic waste to escape into oceans (UNEP and NOAA 
2012; Jambeck et al. 2015). When collection systems and disposal sites are in 
proper operation, waste is less likely to be disposed of haphazardly. 
Photo 7.9 Spilled Garbage on the Beach



175

Although research is in its infancy, sufficient evidence indicates that 
marine litter has a detrimental effect on society. One study estimates that 
costs associated with ocean-based plastic consumer waste leads to losses of 
US$8 billion annually, including revenue losses to fisheries, aquaculture, 
and marine tourism industries in addition to the cost of cleaning up litter on 
beaches (UNEP 2014). 
Marine debris affects marine life through debris entanglement, which 
injures marine life or makes escaping for air or consuming food impossible 
(Laist 1997). Marine litter can also be ingested by sea organisms, with negative 
effects on reproduction and development for both the organisms themselves 
and downstream consumers. A study revealed that marine litter was 
present in all marine turtles studied, 59 percent of whales, 36 percent of 
seals, and 40 percent of seabirds (Foekema et al. 2013). Plastic particles 
have even been found in many species of fish and shellfish sold for human 
consumption. 
Marine waste is expected to grow with increasing population and rising 
per capita consumption, especially in urban areas and quickly developing 
economies. Several policy initiatives related to marine environmental protection 
and pollution have been drafted along with action plans at the 
regional, national, and municipal levels to address the problem. The UN 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015, provides an 
overarching framework to guide international, regional, national, and local 
initiatives. Four out of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals have associated 
targets particularly relevant to marine plastic pollution. At the national 
level, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, and Singapore have 
developed legislation and policies to address marine litter, but such legislation 
remains uncommon globally. At a municipal level, many cities are 
improving waste management practices, and some are implementing plastic 
bans or penalties on bottles and bags, which can reduce plastic usage and 
waste if enforced.



176


17. Using Information Management to Reduce Waste in Korea 

Korea is a high-income country with a population of almost 50 million 
people in 2015 (UN DESA 2014). The country generated 18.2 million 
tonnes of municipal waste in 2014 and recycled 58 percent of its waste, 
achieving one of the highest rates among Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development countries (Kho and Lee 2016). Korea is 
also a global leader in progressive solid waste management legislation, 
under which residents are encouraged to recycle plastics through a deposit 
refund system, reduce waste through volume-based fees, and separate different 
streams of waste at the household and business levels. The country 
has also established an extended producer responsibility system and 
recycles its construction waste. 
Korea established its solid waste management information system in 2001. 
The system digitally records statistics from waste generation to transportation 
and final disposal. The system was developed by the Ministry of 
Information and Communication and comprises three separate databases. 
The Allbaro System is an overarching platform that monitors all waste transportation 
and disposal activities. The system tracks the amount of waste 
that is collected and transported, analyzes truck routes using a geographic 
information system, records licenses and authorization documents, and 
aggregates statistics to support evidence-based policy making. The second 
system uses radio-frequency identification (RFID) to obtain information 
about food waste management. Each household uses a personalized card containing 
an RFID chip to open local food waste disposal bins. Through this 
process, the identity of the household and the weight of waste disposed of is 
instantly recorded, and households are charged a fee based on waste amount. 
In 2013, a 20 percent reduction in food waste was achieved in the capital city 
of Seoul through this digital volume-based system. Finally, the Recyclable 
Information System matches suppliers and buyers of recycled materials on a 
centralized platform. The platform provides information on recycling prices 
and technologies, matches businesses to recycling firms, and facilitates electronic 
bidding. As of September 2013, the platform had registered 69,000 
members. 
Korea’s waste information system has led to cost savings, promoted 
transparency, and eliminated illegal waste disposal. The phased implementation 
of the system allowed stakeholders to adjust to the system successfully. 
Other success factors include a public relations strategy that increased 
awareness and a strong feedback mechanism that enabled the system to be 
improved over time. Most importantly, the waste information system 
allowed a volume-based waste fee to be implemented, which has led to a 
valuable change in citizen behavior and reduced resource consumption.